Title: Tropical Algebraic Geometry for Neuronal Representations: An Arakelov-Green Measure Based Descriptor for Graph Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.04460v1

Published Time: Thu, 06 Aug 2026 00:31:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Tropical Algebraic Geometry for Neuronal Representations: An Arakelov-Green Measure Based Descriptor for Graph Learning 

## Yuyang Zhang 1, Weihan Xu 1, Xuehai Zhou 1, Shucheng Cao 1, Qihuang Zhang 1∗.

> 1

McGill University yuyang.zhang@mail.mcgill.ca, weihan.xu@mail.mcgill.ca, xuehai.zhou@mail.mcgill,ca, shucheng.cao@mail.mcgill.ca, qihuang.zhang@mcgill.ca 

Abstract 

The quantitative analysis of 3D neuronal morphologies re-quires representations that capture both graph topology and 3D spatial geometry. Current message-passing Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are bounded by the 1-Weisfeiler-Lehman (1-WL) test, limiting their ability to capture cycles induced by spatial proximities. To address this, we propose a training-free geometric prior based on tropical algebraic geometry. Recently, the computational foundations for the tropical Abel-Jacobi transform and tropical polarization distances were es-tablished for metric graphs. In this work, we apply these mathematical tools to practical machine learning tasks for tree-structured data. We introduce a structural transforma-tion pipeline, comprising cycle space augmentation and quo-tient space construction, to convert spatial trees into cyclic metric graphs suitable for embeddings into the Tropical Ja-cobian. Computing exact tropical polarization distances re-quires solving the Closest Vector Problem (CVP) on integer lattices, which is NP-Hard. Instead of relying on explicit lat-tice approximations with quantization errors (e.g., Babai’s rounding), we adopt a continuous relaxation on the univer-sal cover of the Albanese torus. We show that the discrete Arakelov-Green measure, computed in closed form via the generalized inverse of the graph Laplacian, decomposes ex-actly into the intrinsic path metric minus the unquantized polarization distance on that cover, and is therefore obtained without any integer lattice search. This metric yields two de-scriptors: its eigenvectors provide node-level structural co-ordinates, and its permutation-invariant eigenvalue spectrum provides a graph-level signature. On the BREC benchmark, the eigenvector formulation demonstrates expressivity beyond the 1-WL limit. On 3D morphology datasets (ACT-4, JML-4, BIL-6), the spectrum integrates into standard architectures (VAEs, GNNs, Tree-LSTMs) without additional trainable pa-rameters. It outperforms explicit lattice approximations and improves classification accuracy compared to existing spatial models. 

## Introduction 

The quantitative analysis of 3D neuronal morphologies re-quires learning representations from spatial trees, where 

> ∗

Corresponding author Copyright © 2027, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved. 

nodes possess 3D Euclidean coordinates. A primary chal-lenge is constructing representations that capture both the graph topology and the spatial geometry, while maintaining invariance to node permutations. Standard message-passing Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are bounded by the 1-Weisfeiler-Lehman (1-WL) graph isomorphism test (Xu et al. 2019). In the context of spatial trees, this limits their ability to capture cycles in-duced by spatially close branches. Conversely, Topological Data Analysis (TDA) captures global cycles but discards pointwise geometric information when vectorizing discrete persistence diagrams into fixed-length descriptors. To evaluate spatial trees using tropical algebraic geometry, we introduce a structural transformation pipeline. Recently, Cao and Monod (Cao and Monod 2025) formalized the com-putational foundations for the tropical Abel-Jacobi transform and tropical polarization distances on metric graphs. We are the first to apply this mathematical framework to practical machine learning tasks, specifically neuronal morphology classification. We perform graph augmentation by adding edges between the root node and spatially close leaf nodes (under a distance threshold ϵ). This transforms the input tree into a graph with a non-trivial cycle space (first Betti num-ber β1 > 0), enabling the projection of the graph into a flat Riemannian torus, the Tropical Jacobian Jac(Γ) = Rg /Λ,via the tropical Abel-Jacobi map. To filter terminal acyclic noise, we apply a quotient space construction prior to dis-tance evaluation. However, utilizing this mathematical framework in large-scale machine learning presents a computational barrier. As proven (Cao and Monod 2025), computing the exact tropical polarization distance on the Tropical Jacobian is mathematically equivalent to the Closest Vector Problem (CVP) on the integer lattice Λ, which is NP-Hard (van Emde Boas 1981a). Existing explicit computations rely on lattice basis reduction algorithms, such as Babai’s rounding(Babai 1986). These discrete approximations introduce quantization errors that degrade the metric space and impose high computational costs. We address this problem by adopting a continuous relaxation on the universal cover Rg . Utilizing the discrete Hodge orthogonal decomposition, we show that the discrete Arakelov-Green measure, computed in closed form via the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse (L+) of the discrete arXiv:2608.04460v1 [cs.LG] 5 Aug 2026 Laplace-Beltrami operator, decomposes exactly into the intrinsic path metric minus the unquantized polarization distance on Rg . By relying on this decomposition, our formulation obtains a robust continuous metric without any integer lattice search, eliminating the quantization errors of discrete approximations. Based on this mechanism, we extract two deterministic, training-free structural descriptors from the Arakelov-Green measure. We summarize our contributions as follows: 

• Application of the Tropical Jacobian to Neuronal Morphologies: We bridge the mathematical framework of the tropical Abel-Jacobi transform to practical machine learning. We design a graph augmentation and quotient space construction pipeline that converts acyclic spatial trees into cyclic metric graphs, encoding 3D spatial proximities into homology groups while filtering data acquisition artifacts. 

• Continuous Relaxation vs. Explicit Lattice Approx-imation: We prove that the discrete Arakelov-Green measure decomposes exactly into the intrinsic path metric minus the unquantized polarization distance on the universal cover Rg . This continuous relaxation (O(|V |3)) is obtained in closed form without any integer lattice search, eliminating the quantization errors associated with explicit lattice rounding algorithms. 

• Theoretical Expressivity and Empirical Performance: 

We demonstrate that this metric yields two distinct de-scriptors. On the BREC benchmark (Wang and Zhang 2024), its node-level eigenvector formulation separates graph pairs beyond the 1-WL limit. On 3D morphol-ogy datasets (ACT-4, JML-4, BIL-6), its graph-level permutation-invariant eigenvalue spectrum integrates into standard architectures (MLPs, GNNs, Tree-LSTMs) without additional trainable parameters and improves classification accuracy. 

## Related Work 

Morphological Representations in Connectomics 

Neuronal morphologies are conventionally modeled as spa-tial trees. Deep learning approaches include sequence-based, point-cloud-based, and graph-based models. Gener-ative models like MorphVAE (Laturnus and Berens 2021) utilize 3D random walks, but stochastic sampling limits global topology extraction. Point-cloud networks such as MorphoGNN (Zhu et al. 2023) apply spatial convolutions over downsampled coordinates, often discarding exact path distances. Tree-based models, including Tree-LSTMs (Tai, Socher, and Manning 2015) and TreeMoCo (Chen et al. 2022), process morphologies as directed acyclic graphs (β1 = 0 ), failing to capture cyclic structures formed by spatially close branches. Our framework addresses this by adding edges based on spatial proximity, encoding 3D ge-ometry into the homology groups of the graph. 

Graph Neural Network Expressivity and Spectral Encodings 

The discriminative power of standard Message Passing Neu-ral Networks (MPNNs) is bounded by the 1-Weisfeiler-Lehman (1-WL) test (Xu et al. 2019). To improve expres-siveness, methods incorporate Positional Encodings (PE) or Structural Encodings (SE) derived from graph Laplacian eigenvectors (Dwivedi et al. 2023). However, explicit spec-tral features suffer from sign and basis ambiguities, requiring specialized canonization (Ma, Wang, and Wang 2023). Alternatively, encoding the effective resistance metric im-proves expressiveness beyond 1-WL (Zhang et al. 2023; Klein and Randić 1993). Our approach aligns with this di-rection using tropical algebraic geometry. We compute the discrete Arakelov-Green measure via the generalized inverse of the discrete Laplace-Beltrami operator ( L+), correspond-ing to the effective resistance on a quotient space. Extracting the eigenvalue spectrum of this matrix yields a permutation-invariant structural signature, bypassing Laplacian eigenvec-tor ambiguities. As validated on the BREC benchmark (Wang and Zhang 2024), this signature demonstrates expressivity beyond standard 1-WL message passing. 

Topological Data Analysis (TDA) 

Topological Data Analysis (TDA) extracts shape character-istics invariant to continuous deformations. For neurons, the Topological Morphology Descriptor (TMD) (Kanari et al. 2019) tracks connected components across a radial filtration. Integrating these discrete persistence diagrams into neural networks requires transformation into continuous represen-tations via Gaussian kernel density estimation (e.g., Persis-tence Images (Adams et al. 2017)). This vectorization process alters the original path distances of the graph and summarizes the structure into a 2D image, preventing exact node-level spatial alignment. Our formula-tion avoids kernel approximations. The generalized inverse 

L+ induces a valid Euclidean Distance Matrix (EDM). Ex-tracting the eigenvalue spectrum of this matrix directly en-codes the graph geometry into a fixed-length topological signature. 

Tropical Geometry and Metric Graphs 

Tropical algebraic geometry analyzes metric graphs by trans-lating Riemann surfaces into tropical curves. Cao and Monod (Cao and Monod 2025) formalize the computation of the tropical Abel-Jacobi transform and polarization distances. They prove that evaluating these distances on the tropical Jacobian requires solving the Closest Vector Problem (CVP) on a lattice, which is NP-Hard. Practical computations thus rely on approximation algorithms like Babai’s nearest plane method. Baker and Faber (Baker and Faber 2010) relate Jacobian metrics to effective resistance, showing that structural bridges collapse to a point under the tropical Abel-Jacobi map. Building on this, we construct a quotient space to contract microscopic bridges. Instead of approximating the NP-hard CVP on the integer lattice, we evaluate the discrete Arakelov-Green measure. Drawing on the formal distinction between the quotient Albanese torus and its universal cover 

Rg (Caporaso and Viviani 2010), we show that this measure decomposes in closed form into the intrinsic path metric minus the unquantized polarization distance on the universal (b) Kron Reduction (c) Cycle Augmentation (d) Quotient Construction (a) Spatial Tree 

> Weights accumulated Path metric preserved:

Figure 1: Overview of the structural transformation pipeline. (a) The input neuronal morphology is modeled as a spatial tree TLCC . (b) Kron reduction eliminates valence-2 vertices. The intrinsic path metric is preserved by accumulat-ing the edge lengths ( ℓnew = ℓ1 + ℓ2), simplifying the graph topology without discarding metric weights. (c) Cycle space augmentation connects spatially proximate leaves to the root within a threshold ϵ. This transforms the tree into a cyclic graph ( β1 > 0), encoding 3D spatial geometry into funda-mental homology groups. (d) Quotient space construction contracts terminal cut-edges below a length threshold τ by driving the Laplacian affinities to infinity ( Wu,v → ∞ ), fil-tering data acquisition artifacts to construct the final metric graph. cover. This continuous relaxation requires no integer lattice search and incurs no rounding error. 

## Methodology 

Our objective is to extract a permutation-invariant and 

SE (3) -invariant structural signature from 3D spatial trees. The framework processes the input structure through metric graph transformation, cycle augmentation, and evaluation of the unquantized polarization distance on the universal cover of the Tropical Jacobian. Figure 1 illustrates the structural transformation stages, and Algorithm 1 summarises the com-plete procedure. 

Metric Graph Formulation and Topological Retraction 

Let a 3D spatial tree be denoted by T = ( V, E ), where V

and E are the sets of vertices and edges, respectively. We formulate this structure as an abstract metric graph Γ = (T , ℓ ). The length function ℓ : E → R>0 is defined as the 

L2 distance of the Euclidean embedding ι : V → R3. We operate on the largest connected component, TLCC .Spatial graphs derived from biological data often contain over-sampled linear segments. To make the representation in-variant to sampling density, we apply Kron reduction (Dörfler and Bullo 2013) to eliminate degree-2 vertices. 

Theorem 0.1 (Metric Preservation via Kron Reduction) . Let 

Vreg = {v ∈ V \ { vroot } | deg( v) = 2 } be the set of valence-2 regular vertices. Evaluating the Schur complement of the combinatorial graph Laplacian with respect to Vreg extracts the minimal skeleton Γmin . This operation preserves the dis-crete Arakelov-Green measure between the retained vertices 

Vcore = V \ Vreg .Proof Sketch. Since this reduction operates on the initial tree TLCC prior to any edge augmentation, the graph contains no cycles. The Schur complement sequentializes the inverse edge weights. This process does not discard metric weights; instead, it accumulates the intrinsic lengths of the eliminated segments into a single consolidated edge (ℓ(u, w ) = ℓ(u, v ) + ℓ(v, w )). Consequently, the updated off-diagonal entries equal the reciprocal of the sum of the original metric lengths, preserving the exact path distances between all remaining core vertices. (See Appendix A.1 for the full proof). □

This reduction decreases the vertex set size from |V | to 

|Vcore |, bounding the subsequent computational complexity to O(|Vcore |3).

Cycle Space Augmentation 

According to the Euler-Poincaré formula, the minimal skele-ton Γmin of a tree has a first Betti number β1 = 0 . Con-sequently, its Jacobian variety is zero-dimensional, meaning the graph topology does not encode extrinsic 3D spatial fold-ing. We introduce cycle space augmentation to encode spatial geometry into the graph topology. Given a distance threshold 

ϵ > 0, let Vcore, leaf denote the leaf vertices of Γmin . We define a set of new edges Eϵ = {(v, v root ) | v ∈ Vcore, leaf , ∥ι(v) −

ι(vroot )∥2 < ϵ } and construct the augmented graph Γϵ =Γmin ∪ Eϵ.By adding edges between the structural root and spatially close leaves, this operation ensures β1(Γ ϵ) > 0. It maps the 3D proximity of branches into the fundamental homology groups H1(Γ ϵ, Z) of the graph, enabling the projection of the graph into a high-dimensional torus. 

Quotient Space Construction 

The augmented graph Γϵ may still contain short terminal branches caused by data acquisition errors (cut-edges disjoint from ker( ∂1)). To remove these branches without altering the cycle basis, we contract them using a quotient space. 

Definition 0.1 (Quotient Metric Space) . Let Ebridge be the set of cut-edges in Γϵ. Given a length threshold τ > 0, define 

E<τ = {e ∈ Ebridge | ℓ(e) < τ }. We define an equivalence relation ∼τ on Vcore such that u ∼τ v if and only if there exists a path between u and v consisting exclusively of edges in E<τ . The quotient space ˜Γϵ = Γ ϵ/ ∼τ is obtained by identifying all vertices within each equivalence class into a single vertex. 

To implement this operation algebraically, we define a weight matrix W . For any edge in E<τ , setting Wu,v → ∞ 

in the discrete Laplace-Beltrami operator forces the resulting metric distance between u and v to zero. In implementation, substituting ∞ with a large scalar (e.g., 10 9) and computing the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse executes the vertex contraction deterministically. 

Tropical Jacobian and the Role of Polarization Distance 

After augmentation and quotienting, the graph ˜Γϵ contains 

g = β1(˜Γϵ) fundamental cycles. Through the Abel-Jacobi map, this graph is projected into a g-dimensional torus, the (e) Baseline: Lattice CVP & Babai Rounding Based (f) Ours:  Arakelov-Green Based (g) Embedded Jacobian Torus 

> Approximated Distance (CVP) Exact Unquantized Distance
> Lattice
> Evaluated via
> Unquantized Projection

Figure 2: Distance evaluation on covering spaces. (e) Ex-plicit lattice approximations compute the tropical polariza-tion distance by solving the Closest Vector Problem (CVP) on the integer lattice Λ. Babai’s rounding maps the contin-uous target to a discrete lattice point (square), inducing a quantization error δ (red dashed vector). (f) Our formula-tion evaluates the exact unquantized minimum on the univer-sal cover Rg using the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse of the discrete Laplace-Beltrami operator ( L+), without requiring integer lattice searches. (g) Projection onto the Riemannian torus Jac(Γ) = Rg /Λ. The explicit CVP approximation in-troduces metric distortion δ, whereas the discrete Arakelov-Green measure evaluates the continuous distance without quantization error. Tropical Jacobian Jac( ˜Γϵ) = Rg /Λ, where Λ is the lattice generated by the fundamental cycles. A torus Rg /Λ is a quotient space. To measure the distance between two points on this torus, an inner product on the universal cover Rg is required. The tropical polarization provides this specific metric tensor, defined by the period matrix Q ∈ Rg×g of the graph. Assigning the polarization distance to the torus has an advantage: rather than relying on a single shortest path between two nodes, the polarization distance integrates spatial information across the entire cycle basis. This allows the metric to encode the global spatial configuration of the graph. 

The Lattice Approximation Baseline and Quantization Error 

Figure 2 contrasts this explicit lattice construction (panels e and g) with the continuous evaluation developed in the fol-lowing subsection (panel f). Computing the exact polarized distance between two points x and y on the discrete torus 

Rg /Λ requires finding the optimal lattice translation n ∈ Zg

that minimizes the distance. This is mathematically equiva-lent to the Closest Vector Problem (CVP) on the lattice Λ:

dT rop (x, y ) = min 

> n∈Zg



(x − y − Qn )⊤Q−1(x − y − Qn )

 12

(1) 

Solving the CVP is NP-Hard. Practical implementa-tions must rely on polynomial-time approximations, such as Babai’s rounding algorithm. Let t denote the continuous coordinate difference before applying the lattice constraints. Babai’s algorithm maps t to a discrete lattice point by round-ing: ˆn = ⌊Q−1t⌉.This approximation introduces a quantization error vector 

δ = Q−1t − ˆn. Consequently, the approximated squared distance deviates from the true minimum by a discrepancy proportional to the quadratic form δT Qδ . As demonstrated in our experiments (Section ), this quantization error distorts the structural representation, leading to performance degradation in graph classification tasks. This motivates evaluating the continuous relaxation on the universal cover instead, which requires no integer search and, as Table 3 shows, also yields a more discriminative descriptor. 

Closed-Form Unquantized Evaluation on the Universal Cover 

We compute pairwise distances on the quotient space ˜Γϵ

using discrete potential theory. Let L = diag (W 1) − W

be the graph Laplacian. We compute its Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse L+. The Arakelov-Green measure MAG ∈

R|Vcore |×| Vcore | is evaluated via the quadratic form: 

MAG (x, y ) = L+ 

> x,x

+ L+ 

> y,y

− 2L+ 

> x,y

(2) 

Evaluating exact distances on the Tropical Jacobian 

Jac( ˜Γϵ) = Rg /Λ requires solving the CVP on the integer lattice Λ, which is NP-Hard (Cao and Monod 2025). Instead of computing this discrete integer projection, we prove that 

MAG evaluates the continuous minimum of the Dirichlet energy. Mathematically, MAG incorporates the unquantized polarization distance on the universal cover Rg as an exact subtractive correction to the intrinsic path metric: 

MAG (x, y ) = ∥pxy ∥2  

> W−1

− (∆Φ xy )⊤Q−1(∆Φ xy ) (3) 

where ∥pxy ∥2  

> W−1

is the base path metric, and the second term is the squared unquantized distance on the universal cover Rg . This continuous formulation naturally encodes the geometric polarization induced by spatial cycles, and is ob-tained in closed form without any integer lattice search. Sec-tion shows that this continuous relaxation also avoids the quantization error of explicit rounding, yielding consistently higher accuracy than the explicit baseline. 

Spectral Feature Extraction 

Because the generalized inverse L+ is positive semi-definite, there exists a matrix B such that L+ = BB T . The quadratic form can be rewritten as MAG (x, y ) = ∥bx − by ∥22, showing that MAG is a conditionally negative definite matrix that induces a Euclidean Distance Matrix (EDM). To derive a fixed-size representation, we compute its eigen-value spectrum Σ = {λ1, λ 2, . . . , λ |Vcore |}. For any permu-tation matrix P , the permuted matrix P M AG P T yields the same spectrum. Therefore, we extract the top-K abso-lute eigenvalues SΓ = TopK (SortDescending (|Σ|), K ) as a permutation-invariant signature. This structural prior is then concatenated with node or graph features in neural architec-tures. 

## Experiments 

We empirically evaluate our framework’s expressiveness against the 1-Weisfeiler-Lehman (1-WL) test on graph isomorphism benchmarks, and assess its effectiveness as a structural prior on 3D neuronal morphologies. 

Theoretical Validation: Graph Isomorphism 

Standard message-passing networks are 1-WL bounded, limiting their ability to distinguish certain spatial cycles. We Algorithm 1: Spectral Signature via Arakelov-Green Mea-sure                                                                               

> Input : Spatial tree T= ( V, E, ι ), proximity threshold ϵ, contrac-tion threshold τ, feature dimension K.
> Output :Permutation-invariant spectral signature SΓ∈
> RK.1: Step 1: Topological Retraction
> 2: Γmin ←KronReduction (TLCC )
> 3: Step 2: Cycle Space Augmentation
> 4: Eϵ← { (v, v root )|v∈Vcore, leaf ,∥ι(v)−ι(vroot )∥2< ϵ }
> 5: Γϵ←Γmin ∪Eϵ
> 6: Step 3: Quotient Space Construction
> 7: Ebridge ←CutEdges (Γ ϵ)
> 8: Construct weight matrix W∈R|Vcore |×| Vcore |where: 9: Wu,v =
> (
> ∞,if eu,v ∈Ebridge and ℓ(eu,v )< τ
> 1/ℓ (eu,v ),otherwise 10: Step 4: Arakelov-Green Measure Evaluation
> 11: L←diag (W1)−W
> 12: L+←GeneralizedInverse (L)
> 13: MAG ←diag (L+)1T+1diag (L+)T−2L+
> 14: Step 5: Spectral Extraction
> 15: Σ←Spectrum (MAG )
> 16: SΓ←TopK (SortDescending (|Σ|), K )
> 17: return SΓ

evaluate our metric’s expressive power on the BREC dataset (Wang and Zhang 2024), comprising 400 symmetric graph pairs. 

Setup & Analysis: After computing the discrete Arakelov-Green distance matrix, we extract its absolute eigenvectors to ensure permutation equivariance and resolve sign ambiguity. These structural coordinates are concate-nated with standard node features and processed via a Graph Isomorphism Network augmented with Jumping Knowledge (AG-GIN). As detailed in Table 1, AG-GIN separates 70 .0% 

of total pairs, achieving 100% on Basic and Extension 

categories. It yields 33 .0% on the challenging CFI category, outperforming higher-order/subgraph GNNs like I 2-GNN (21 .0% ) and PPGN ( 23 .0% ). This confirms our metric maps non-isomorphic cyclic structures to distinct representations.                                              

> Model / Type Basic Regular Extend CFI Total
> Theoretical (60) (140) (100) (100) (400) 3-WL Test 100% 35.7% 100% 60.0% 67.5%
> Transformers
> Graphormer 26.7% 8.6% 41.0% 10.0% 19.8%
> High-Order GNNs
> NGNN (Subgraph) 98.3% 34.3% 59.0% 0.0% 41.5% PPGN ( k-WL) 100% 35.7% 100% 23.0% 58.2% KP-GNN (Subgraph) 100% 75.7% 98.0% 11.0% 68.8% I2-GNN (Subgraph) 100% 71.4% 100% 21.0% 70.2% AG-GIN (Ours) 100% 62.1% 100% 33.0% 70.0%

Table 1: Pair distinguishing accuracies on the BREC bench-mark. The AG-GIN demonstrates expressivity beyond stan-dard 1-WL message passing. Furthermore, unlike subgraph GNNs requiring O(|V |3)

enumerations per training step, our operator evaluates the metric algebraically in a single preprocessing step. 

Empirical Evaluation on 3D Morphologies 

Datasets: We evaluate on three biological datasets con-figured following prior benchmarks (Chen et al. 2022): 

ACT (Allen Cell Types) (Gouwens et al. 2019) with 495 manually labeled neurons from the mouse visual cortex (reconstructions are flat due to thin slicing); JML (Janelia MouseLight) (Gao et al. 2023; Winnubst et al. 2019) comprising 505 automatically labeled, complete projection neurons; and BIL (BICCN fMOST) (Peng et al. 2021) containing 1,413 manually labeled, complete neurons from diverse regions (cortex, claustrum, striatum, thalamus). 

Evaluation Protocol & Hyperparameters: We employ 10-fold cross-validation with absolute coordinate normal-ization, using folds 0–7 for training and 8–9 for a strict single-evaluation test set. Results report the mean and stan-dard deviation across 5 random seeds at the best-validation epoch. Models are optimized via AdamW (peak learning rate 

10 −3 or 10 −4, weight decay 10 −4) with cosine annealing (Tmax = 150 , ηmin = 10 −6) and gradient clipping at 1.0. Training terminates with a patience of 25 epochs, utilizing batch sizes of 128 (tree-based) or 64 (point-cloud). 

Necessity of Spatial Coordinates Under translation-invariant settings, where absolute Cartesian anchors are removed to prevent coordinate memorization, TRNN (a topological sequence model) degrades severely ( 33 .70% on ACT-4, 31 .00% on BIL-6). This confirms sequential topo-logical traversals lose spatial awareness without absolute coordinate mappings. 

Analysis of Transformer-based Architectures Recent Transformer architectures utilize specialized preprocessing pipelines complicating direct structural comparisons. To ensure controlled evaluations, we analyze their components mechanically. 

GraPHFormer (Shah et al. 2026) relies on multi-modal continuous vectorization (2D persistence images via Gaus-sian kernel density estimation) altering the original graph metric. To isolate its graph representation capability, we eval-uate its native TreeLSTM-Double branch under our 80%– 20% split, yielding 54 .52% (ACT-4), 73 .33% (JML-4), and 

82 .97% (BIL-6). Our TreeLSTM augmented with the AG prior outperforms this branch across all datasets, isolating the full GraPHFormer’s remaining performance gap to its multi-modal image augmentations. See appendix for details. 

SGTMorph: The SGTMorph architecture (Sheng et al. 2025) is tightly coupled with a specialized preprocessing pipeline involving pre-computed heuristics, min-max box-normalization, and random jitter. Forcing this pipeline into our strict absolute coordinate protocol would fundamentally alter their intended data distribution, risking an unfair comparison. Instead, to rigorously isolate their morpholog-ical learning capacity, we independently constructed and evaluated a positional probe utilizing their exact min-max normalization strategy. Predicting labels purely from these normalized soma coordinates yields 61 .0% on JML-4 and Method / Architecture ACT-4 JML-4 BIL-6                                                                                           

> Sequence and Tree-Based Paradigms
> TRNN (Translation-Inv.) 33 .70 ±1.45 42 .90 ±1.62 31 .00 ±1.80
> TreeMoCo (Chen et al. 2022) (k-NN, Unsupervised) 60 .21 ±1.73 63 .16 ±0.93 77 .36 ±0.89
> TreeMoCo (Chen et al. 2022) (Fine-tuned, Supervised) 57 .05 ±1.73 72 .89 ±1.50 87 .19 ±1.13
> GraPHFormer (Tree Branch) (Shah et al. 2026) 54 .52 ±1.37 73 .33 ±2.67 82 .97 ±0.54
> TreeLSTM (+ AG Prior) [Ours] 69 .68 ±3.61 74 .29 ±2.23 93 .55 ±0.56
> Graph-Based Paradigms
> MorphoGNN (Zhu et al. 2023) 52 .21 ±2.27 65 .19 ±2.52 88 .45 ±0.75
> Ours (GNN Integration) 54 .32 ±2.71 (+2.11) 76 .36 ±0.97 (+11.17) 92 .15 ±0.45 (+3.70)
> Generative Paradigms
> MorphVAE (Laturnus and Berens 2021) 44 .63 ±1.76 51 .95 ±5.19 55 .04 ±1.97
> MorphVAE (+ AG Prior) 48 .84 ±1.60 (+4.21) 61 .56 ±4.07 (+9.61) 75 .29 ±0.61 (+20.25)
> Specialized Spatial Transformers (Different Preprocessing)
> SGTMorph (Supervised) (Sheng et al. 2025) –72 .40 88 .90

Table 2: Classification accuracy (%) on 3D morphological benchmarks. We partition the models by their architectural paradigms. For Graph and Generative paradigms, we report controlled ablations against their respective baselines to isolate the exact gain (∆) of our structural prior. All results are from our own reimplementation under an identical pipeline, split, and seeds, except for SGTMorph, whose results are quoted from the literature due to specific preprocessing dependencies. 

74 .8% on BIL-6. Crucially, our empirical probe results remain significantly lower than the full-model accuracies published in their paper ( 72 .4% and 88 .9% , respectively). This validates that SGTMorph effectively captures true morphological structures rather than merely exploiting coordinate leakage. Ultimately, while their method requires transforming the spatial input, our Arakelov-Green frame-work operates directly on unaugmented metric graphs, yielding superior structural discrimination (e.g., 93 .55% vs. their 88 .90% on BIL-6). See appendix for details. 

Integration Protocols for Baseline Architectures Let 

s ∈ Rds denote the pre-computed Arakelov-Green (AG) spectral signature for a given input graph G (ds = 64 ). Let MLP spec : Rds → Rdp be a multi-layer perceptron with Layer Normalization mapping the spectral signature to a dp-dimensional representation. The operator ⊕ denotes feature-wise concatenation. 

1. Integration in Tree-based Paradigms. We evaluate our TreeLSTM model against TreeMoCo (Chen et al. 2022), which utilizes a Momentum Contrast objective. For TreeMoCo, we report both its unsupervised k-NN performance (using 334,720 trainable parameters for the backbone) and its supervised fine-tuned performance (using up to 335,494 trainable parameters). To represent our approach in this paradigm, we use a supervised TreeLSTM. Under the default configuration (hidden dimension 128), our TreeLSTM combined with the AG prior projection contains only 97,792 trainable parameters. Let hroot ∈ Rdh be the final hidden state aggregated at the root node. The spectral feature is integrated via late fusion:        

> hTree_fused =MLP graph (hroot )⊕MLP spec (s)∈Rd′
> h+dp(4)

As shown in Table 2, despite utilizing fewer than one-third of the parameters, our TreeLSTM (+ AG Prior) outperforms the fine-tuned TreeMoCo on all datasets (e.g., 93 .55% vs 

87 .19% on BIL-6). 

2. Integration in MorphoGNN. The model samples the neuron into a point cloud and processes it via EdgeConv layers. Let vpc ∈ R2048 denote the global point cloud representation. The spectral feature is injected post-pooling: 

hMorpho_fused = vpc ⊕ MLP spec (s).

3. Integration in MorphVAE. A Seq2Seq framework en-codes 3D random walks sampled from the neuron. Let rT ∈

Rk represent the global latent vector. The spectral feature is appended to this latent vector: rfused = rT ⊕ MLP spec (s).The projection layer (MLP spec ) aligns the dimension and scale of the spectral features with the latent space of the backbone architectures. Training a standalone classifier exclusively on the spectral signature s without the neural backbone yields sub-optimal accuracy. This indicates that the performance improvements derive from the combination of the structural prior with the local operations of the base-line networks, rather than from the parameters introduced by the projection layer. 

Continuous Evaluation vs. Explicit Lattice Approximation 

Exact CVP evaluation on the Tropical Jacobian requires 

O(2 g ) enumerations ( g = β1(˜Γϵ)). At ϵ = 50 .0, maximum 

g reaches 106 (ACT-4), 35 (JML-4), and 30 (BIL-6), CVP limits (e.g., O(2 106 )) computationally intractable and necessitating approximations like Babai’s rounding. To ensure strict comparison, we construct a controlled baseline using BFS fundamental cycles, computing period matrix Q,and approximating distances via Babai’s method. Using a frozen k-NN classifier at ϵ = 50 .0, τ = 10 .0, we compare this explicit lattice approximation against our continuous formulation (Table 3). Dataset CVP Baseline Continuous AG (Ours)                        

> Acc Mac-F1 Time(s) Acc Mac-F1 Time(s) ACT-4 47.37 45.20 109.2 49.47 47.79 16.8
> JML-4 49.35 32.49 376.7 48.05 36.21 103.0
> BIL-6 52.89 41.27 908.1 64.05 46.65 219.1

Table 3: Performance and efficiency comparison between the explicit lattice approximation (CVP) and the continuous evaluation (AG) at ϵ = 50 .0, τ = 10 .0. Time denotes the preprocessing cost in seconds.                                      

> ϵτACT-4 JML-4 BIL-6
> Acc Mac-F1 Acc Mac-F1 Acc Mac-F1 0.0 0.0 41.05 38.71 49.35 32.48 52.07 38.87 50.0 0.0 45.26 43.09 49.35 32.48 52.48 40.12 0.0 10.0 46.32 44.73 45.45 39.69 63.64 47.24 50.0 10.0 49.47 47.79 48.05 36.21 64.05 46.65

Table 4: Ablation Study of the Proposed Method. Perfor-mance is measured in Accuracy (%) and Macro F1 (%). The continuous formulation demonstrates specific advantages: 1. Avoidance of Quantization Error and Basis Ambiguity: The rounding operation ˆn = ⌊Q−1t⌉

introduces quantization errors and does not commute with basis transformation matrices U ∈ GL g (Z), making the explicit descriptor basis-dependent. Conversely, our contin-uous formulation evaluates deterministically without basis extraction, avoiding quantization errors and consistently yielding higher Macro F1 scores (though CVP retains a marginal simple accuracy edge on the imbalanced JML-4). 

2. Algorithmic Efficiency: Continuous evaluation reduces preprocessing time by 4.1×–6.5× via fully parallelizable dense linear algebra (a single matrix pseudoinverse). Explicit CVP suffers from sequential graph traversals for homology extraction, memory inflation by a factor of g (projecting N

nodes into Rg×N ×N ), and dynamic programming bottle-necks (e.g., Floyd-Warshall O(|V |3)) to compute all-pairs shortest paths for acyclic backbone metric compensation. 

Ablation Study 

To isolate the contributions of algebraic operations, we ablate the spatial proximity threshold ϵ (cycle space aug-mentation) and structural threshold τ (quotient space vertex contraction) using a frozen k-NN classifier to remove neural network optimization confounders (Table 4). 

Effects of Cycle and Quotient Spaces: The control setting ( ϵ = 0 .0, τ = 0 .0) algebraically reduces to standard resistance distance. Inducing spatial 1-simplices ( ϵ > 0) en-codes spatial proximities into homological cycles, while edge contraction ( τ > 0) forms a quotient space contracting ter-minal variations. Combined operations ( ϵ = 50 .0, τ = 10 .0)yield the highest structural discrimination on ACT-4 and BIL-6. On JML-4, comprising complete and uniform projection neurons, terminal branches represent genuine morphology rather than acquisition artifacts. Consequently, their contraction is sub-optimal for absolute accuracy (though it improves Macro F1 on imbalanced classes), and the two operations do not constructively compose. 

## Conclusion 

The quantitative representation of 3D neuronal morpholo-gies requires capturing both graph topology and spatial geometry. In this work, we address this requirement using tropical algebraic geometry. Evaluating exact distances on the discrete Tropical Jacobian requires solving the NP-Hard Closest Vector Problem (CVP) on integer lattices. Instead of computing this discrete integer projection, we adopt a continuous relaxation on the universal cover Rg . We prove that the discrete Arakelov-Green measure, computed in closed form via the generalized inverse of the discrete Laplace-Beltrami operator, decomposes exactly into the intrinsic path metric minus the unquantized polarization distance on this continuous space, and is therefore obtained without any integer lattice search. This approach avoids the quantization errors associated with discrete lattice approximations, yielding superior empirical accuracy. This metric yields two distinct structural descriptors. Its eigenvector formulation provides node-level coordinates that demonstrate expressivity beyond the standard 1-WL test on the BREC benchmark. Its permutation-invariant eigenvalue spectrum provides a graph-level signature that improves the classification accuracy of standard architectures (MLPs, GNNs, Tree-LSTMs) on 3D morphology datasets without additional trainable parameters. Overall, it offers an effi-cient, training-free geometric prior for graph representation learning. 

## Limitations and Future Work 

Our framework provides a deterministic structural prior with O(|Vcore |3) preprocessing complexity. A core design choice of this method is the deliberate removal of absolute coordinate anchoring. Parameterized spatial models relying on dense coordinate regression may achieve high accuracy on specific datasets by memorizing absolute spatial distri-butions. In contrast, our signature isolates geometric and topological invariants. While this discards dataset-specific positional cues, it prevents coordinate memorization and ensures invariance to continuous spatial transformations. This trade-off presents a distinct direction for future research. The mathematical decomposition of the discrete Arakelov-Green measure over the continuous universal cover opens new avenues for graph network design. Rather than using the extracted spectra solely as concatenated input fea-tures, future research will explore using the unquantized dis-tance matrix to define new message-passing operators. This could lead to network architectures that process information directly over the covering spaces of metric graphs, combin-ing the theoretical properties of tropical algebraic geometry with the scalability of end-to-end representation learning. 

## Data Availability 

https://github.com/Yyuzrah/CLEAR-MIND References 

Adams, H.; Emerson, T.; Kirby, M.; Neville, R.; Peterson, C.; Shipman, P.; Chepushtanova, S.; Hanson, E.; Motta, F.; and Ziegelmeier, L. 2017. Persistence Images: A Stable Vector Representation of Persistent Homology. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 18(8): 1–35. Babai, L. 1986. On Lovász lattice reduction and the nearest point problem. Combinatorica , 6(1): 1–13. Baker, M.; and Faber, X. 2010. Metric Properties of the Tropical Abel-Jacobi Map. arXiv:0905.1679. Cao, Y.; and Monod, A. 2025. Computing the Tropical Abel– Jacobi Transform and Tropical Distances for Metric Graphs. arXiv:2504.11619. Caporaso, L.; and Viviani, F. 2010. Torelli theorem for graphs and tropical curves. Duke Mathematical Journal , 153(1): 129–171. Chen, H.; Yang, J.; Iascone, D. M.; Liu, L.; He, L.; Peng, H.; and Yao, J. 2022. TreeMoCo: contrastive neuron mor-phology representation learning. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’22. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713871088. Dörfler, F.; and Bullo, F. 2013. Kron Reduction of Graphs With Applications to Electrical Networks. IEEE Transac-tions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers , 60(1): 150– 163. Dwivedi, V. P.; Joshi, C. K.; Luu, A. T.; Laurent, T.; Bengio, Y.; and Bresson, X. 2023. Benchmarking Graph Neural Networks. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 24(43): 1–48. Gao, L.; Liu, S.; Wang, Y.; Wu, Q.; Gou, L.; and Yan, J. 2023. Single-neuron analysis of dendrites and axons reveals the network organization in mouse prefrontal cortex. Nature Neuroscience , 26(6): 1111–1126. Gouwens, N. W.; Sorensen, S. A.; Berg, J.; Lee, C.; Jarsky, T.; Ting, J.; Sunkin, S. M.; Feng, D.; Anastassiou, C. A.; Barkan, E.; Bickley, K.; Blesie, N.; Braun, T.; Brouner, K.; Budzillo, A.; Caldejon, S.; Casper, T.; Castelli, D.; Chong, P.; Crichton, K.; Cuhaciyan, C.; Daigle, T. L.; Dalley, R.; Dee, N.; Desta, T.; Ding, S.-L.; Dingman, S.; Doperalski, A.; Dotson, N.; Egdorf, T.; Fisher, M.; de Frates, R. A.; Garren, E.; Garwood, M.; Gary, A.; Gaudreault, N.; Godfrey, K.; Gorham, M.; Gu, H.; Habel, C.; Hadley, K.; Harrington, J.; Harris, J. A.; Henry, A.; Hill, D.; Josephsen, S.; Kebede, S.; Kim, L.; Kroll, M.; Lee, B.; Lemon, T.; Link, K. E.; Liu, X.; Long, B.; Mann, R.; McGraw, M.; Mihalas, S.; Mukora, A.; Murphy, G. J.; Ng, L.; Ngo, K.; Nguyen, T. N.; Nicovich, P. R.; Oldre, A.; Park, D.; Parry, S.; Perkins, J.; Potekhina, L.; Reid, D.; Robertson, M.; Sandman, D.; Schroedter, M.; Slaughterbeck, C.; Soler-Llavina, G.; Sulc, J.; Szafer, A.; Tasic, B.; Taskin, N.; Teeter, C.; Thatra, N.; Tung, H.; Wakeman, W.; Williams, G.; Young, R.; Zhou, Z.; Farrell, C.; Peng, H.; Hawrylycz, M. J.; Lein, E.; Ng, L.; Arkhipov, A.; Bernard, A.; Phillips, J. W.; Zeng, H.; and Koch, C. 2019. Classification of electrophysiological and morphological neuron types in the mouse visual cortex. 

Nature Neuroscience , 22(7): 1182–1195. Kanari, L.; Ramaswamy, S.; Shi, Y.; Morand, S.; Meystre, J.; Perin, R.; Abdellah, M.; Wang, Y.; Hess, K.; and Markram, H. 2019. Objective Morphological Classification of Neocor-tical Pyramidal Cells. Cerebral Cortex , 29(4): 1719–1735. Published online 2018. Klein, D. J.; and Randić, M. 1993. Resistance Distance. 

Journal of Mathematical Chemistry , 12(1): 81–95. Laturnus, S.; and Berens, P. 2021. MorphVAE: Generating Neural Morphologies from 3D-Walks using a Variational Autoencoder with Spherical Latent Space. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning ,volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research ,5971–5981. PMLR. Ma, J.; Wang, Y.; and Wang, Y. 2023. Laplacian Canon-ization: A Minimalist Approach to Sign and Basis Invariant Spectral Embedding. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36. Peng, H.; Xie, P.; Liu, L.; Kuang, X.; Wang, Y.; Qu, L.; Gong, H.; Jiang, S.; Li, A.; Ruan, Z.; Ding, L.; Yao, Z.; Chen, C.; Chen, M.; Daigle, T. L.; Dalley, R.; Ding, Z.; Duan, Y.; Feiner, A.; He, P.; Hill, C.; Hirokawa, K. E.; Hong, G.; Huang, L.; Kebede, S.; Kuo, H.-C.; Larsen, R.; Lesnar, P.; Li, L.; Li, Q.; Li, X.; Li, Y.; Li, Y.; Liu, A.; Lu, D.; Mok, S.; Ng, L.; Nguyen, T. N.; Ouyang, Q.; Pan, J.; Shen, E.; Song, Y.; Sunkin, S. M.; Tasic, B.; Veldman, M. B.; Wakeman, W.; Wan, W.; Wang, P.; Wang, Q.; Wang, T.; Wang, Y.; Xiong, F.; Xiong, W.; Xu, W.; Ye, M.; Yin, L.; Yu, Y.; Yuan, J.; Yuan, J.; Yun, Z.; Zeng, S.; Zhang, S.; Zhao, S.; Zhao, Z.; Zhou, Z.; Huang, Z. J.; Esposito, L.; Hawrylycz, M. J.; Sorensen, S. A.; Yang, X. W.; Zheng, Y.; Gu, Z.; Xie, W.; Koch, C.; Luo, Q.; Harris, J. A.; Wang, Y.; and Zeng, H. 2021. Morphological diversity of single neurons in molecularly defined cell types. 

Nature , 598(7879): 174–181. Shah, U.; Agus, M.; Gamal, M.; Alzubaidi, M.; Cali, C.; Magistretti, P. J.; Bouzerdoum, A.; and Househ, M. 2026. GraPHFormer: A Multimodal Graph Persistent Homology Transformer for the Analysis of Neuroscience Morphologies. arXiv:2603.20970. Sheng, P.; Zhao, G.; Han, T.; and Qu, L. 2025. Self-Supervised Neuron Morphology Representation With Graph Transformer. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging ,44(12): 5332–5344. Tai, K. S.; Socher, R.; and Manning, C. D. 2015. Improved Semantic Representations From Tree-Structured Long Short-Term Memory Networks. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-guage Processing , 1556–1566. van Emde Boas, P. 1981a. Another NP-complete partition problem and the complexity of computing short vectors in a lattice. Technical Report 81-04, Department of Mathematics, University of Amsterdam. van Emde Boas, P. 1981b. Another NP-complete parti-tion problem and the complexity of computing short vec-tors in a lattice. Technical Report MI-UvA-81-04, Mathe-matisch Instituut, Universiteit van Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Wang, Y.; and Zhang, M. 2024. An Empirical Study of Realized GNN Expressiveness. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR. Winnubst, J.; Bas, E.; Ferreira, T. A.; Wu, Z.; Economo, M. N.; Edson, P.; Arthur, B. J.; Bruns, C.; Rokicki, K.; Schauder, D.; et al. 2019. Reconstruction of 1,000 pro-jection neurons reveals new cell types and organization of long-range connectivity in the mouse brain. Cell , 179(1): 268–281. Xu, K.; Hu, W.; Leskovec, J.; and Jegelka, S. 2019. How Powerful are Graph Neural Networks? In International Con-ference on Learning Representations .Zhang, B.; Luo, S.; Wang, L.; and He, D. 2023. Rethinking the Expressive Power of GNNs via Graph Biconnectivity. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations .Zhu, T.; Yao, G.; Hu, D.; Xie, C.; Li, P.; Yang, X.; Gong, H.; Luo, Q.; and Li, A. 2023. Data-Driven Morphological Feature Perception of Single Neuron With Graph Neural Network. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , 42(10): 3069–3079. Appendix A: Mathematical Proofs and Integration Protocols 

This appendix provides the mathematical proofs for the theo-rems established in the main text and details the architectural integration protocols. The derivations are based on discrete potential theory, tropical algebraic geometry, and spectral graph theory. 

A.1 Metric Preservation under Topological Retraction 

Definition .2. Let Γ = ( V, E, ℓ ) be a connected metric graph with symmetric affinity matrix W ∈ R|V |×| V |, where 

Wu,v = 1 /ℓ (u, v ) for (u, v ) ∈ E. The discrete Laplace-Beltrami operator is L = diag( W 1) − W . Partition the vertex set as V = Vcore ∪ Vreg , where Vreg contains exclu-sively degree-2 vertices. The Schur complement of L with respect to Vreg is LS = Lcore − Lmix L−1 

> reg

L⊤

> mix

.

Theorem .2 (Metric Preservation) . For any vertices x, y ∈

Vcore , the discrete metric evaluated by the generalized inverse 

L+ on the original graph is identical to the metric evaluated by L+ 

> S

on the reduced graph. Furthermore, the reciprocal of the updated non-zero off-diagonal entries in LS equals the Lebesgue sum of the intrinsic metric lengths along the retracted paths. Proof. The Laplacian quadratic form v⊤Lv quantifies the Dirichlet energy of a discrete potential function v. Minimiz-ing this quadratic form over the intermediate variables Vreg 

subject to fixed boundary conditions on Vcore defines the har-monic extension, which is resolved by the Schur complement 

LS . Because the discrete metric between x, y ∈ Vcore is the inverse of the minimal quadratic form required to establish a unit potential difference, and since no external constraints are placed on Vreg , the internal Gaussian elimination pre-serves the global minimum. Thus, L+ 

> xx

+ L+ 

> yy

− 2L+ 

> xy

=(L+ 

> S

)xx + ( L+ 

> S

)yy − 2( L+ 

> S

)xy .For an isolated degree-2 node v ∈ Vreg connected to u, w ∈

Vcore , the block Lreg reduces to a scalar Wuv + Wvw . The Schur elimination updates the off-diagonal affinity between 

u and w as: 

−(LS )uw = W ′ 

> uw

= Wuw + Wuv Wvw 

Wuv + Wvw 

Assuming Wuw = 0 (no initial edge), the new consolidated affinity is W ′ 

> uw

= Wuv Wvw   

> Wuv +Wvw

. Taking the algebraic reciprocal yields the intrinsic metric length: 

1

W ′

> uw

= Wuv + Wvw 

Wuv Wvw 

= 1

Wuv 

+ 1

Wvw 

= ℓ(u, v ) + ℓ(v, w )

This equates to the sum of intrinsic segment lengths forming the retracted macroscopic path. 

A.2 Betti Number and Homological Augmentation 

Definition .3. Let T = ( V, E, ι ) be a spatial tree, char-acterized by a first Betti number β1(T ) = 0 . Let Eϵ =

{e1, e 2, . . . , e k} be k adjoined 1-simplices forming the aug-mented spatial graph Γϵ = T ∪ Eϵ.

Theorem .3 (Homological Augmentation) . The augmented graph Γϵ possesses a first Betti number β1(Γ ϵ) = k. Ad-ditionally, each augmented 1-simplex ei ∈ Eϵ maps bijec-tively to a unique, linearly independent 1-cycle generator in 

ker( ∂1).Proof. We invoke the Euler-Poincaré formula for a connected topological space, χ = |V |−| Etotal | = β0 −β1. For the base-line tree T , since β0 = 1 and β1 = 0 , we have |V |−| E| = 1 .For the augmented graph Γϵ, the total edge count is |E| + k.Because edge adjunction onto a connected component pre-serves connectedness, β0 remains 1. The Euler characteristic of Γϵ evaluates to: 

|V | − (|E| + k) = ( |V | − | E|) − k = 1 − k

Equating this to β0 −β1 = 1 −β1 yields 1−k = 1 −β1 =⇒

β1 = k.To construct the explicit homology basis, isolate any aug-mented edge ei = ( ui, v i) ∈ Eϵ. Because T is a tree, there exists a simple path pi ⊂ E connecting vi back to ui. The for-mal chain sum zi = ei +pi is closed ( ∂1zi = 0 ), forming a 1-cycle. The collection {z1, z 2, . . . , z k} is linearly independent because each zi contains exactly one simplex ei /∈ supp (zj )

for all j̸ = i. Given dim(ker( ∂1)) = β1 = k, this set forms a complete and bijective basis for the fundamental homology group H1(Γ ϵ, Z).

A.3 Metric Quotient Space via Affinity Limits 

Theorem .4 (Metric Quotient Isometry) . Let euv = ( u, v ) be a cut-edge in Γϵ, such that it belongs to the support of no cycle 

z ∈ ker( ∂1). The analytic limit lim Wu,v →∞ MAG (u, v ) = 0 

guarantees a well-defined equivalence relation ∼τ , inducing a quotient metric space ˜Γϵ = Γ ϵ/ ∼τ wherein the topology of the macroscopic cycle space remains invariant. Proof. By discrete potential theory, evaluating 

MAG (u, v ) = L+ 

> uu

+ L+ 

> vv

− 2L+ 

> uv

equates to solving for the minimal W −1-norm of a 1-chain flow fuv satisfying the boundary condition ∂1fuv = δu − δv . Because euv 

is a cut-edge, any valid 1-chain satisfying this boundary condition must assign a coefficient of 1 to euv , as its removal disconnects the graph. The minimal quadratic form 

∥fuv ∥2  

> W−1

is dictated by the inverse affinity of the edge itself, yielding MAG (u, v ) = 1 /W u,v .Taking the limit Wu,v → ∞ , we obtain MAG (u, v ) → 0.Since this quadratic form satisfies metric axioms on any con-nected graph, coercing the distance between adjacent nodes to zero transforms the metric into a pseudometric. Defin-ing x ∼τ y ⇐⇒ MAG (x, y ) = 0 constitutes a valid equivalence relation, collapsing the bridge euv into a singu-lar quotient vertex. Because euv is disjoint from ker( ∂1), its contraction alters neither the cycle basis nor the Betti number 

β1.

A.4 Continuous Identity on the Universal Cover 

Theorem .5 (Continuous Identity) . Let fxy ∈ C1(˜Γϵ; R) be a 1-chain satisfying ∂1fxy = δx − δy . Let Z1 = ker( ∂1)be defined by the cycle basis C ∈ Rg×| E|, with the pe-riod matrix Q = CW −1C⊤, and the continuous pro-jection map ∆Φ xy = CW −1pxy . The minimization of the 1-chain path norm yields MAG (x, y ) = ∥pxy ∥2  

> W−1

−

(∆Φ xy )⊤Q−1(∆Φ xy ), where the latter subtractive term rep-resents the squared distance on the universal cover Rg of the Albanese torus. Proof. By the discrete Hodge orthogonal decomposition, any 1-chain satisfying the boundary conditions can be pa-rameterized as fxy = pxy + C⊤c for a continuous cyclic coefficient vector c ∈ Rg , where pxy is a base 1-chain. We minimize the quadratic functional:           

> E(c) = ∥pxy +C⊤c∥2
> W−1
> =∥pxy ∥2
> W−1+ 2 c⊤∆Φ xy +c⊤Qc

Because Q is a positive-definite Gram matrix, the functional is convex. Setting the gradient with respect to c to zero yields the unique global minimum c∗ = −Q−1∆Φ xy . Substituting 

c∗ back into the functional gives:                  

> MAG (x, y ) = E(c∗)=∥pxy ∥2
> W−1−2(∆Φ xy )⊤Q−1(∆Φ xy )+ (∆Φ xy )⊤Q−1QQ −1(∆Φ xy )=∥pxy ∥2
> W−1−(∆Φ xy )⊤Q−1(∆Φ xy )

The subtractive term evaluates the squared metric distance of the unquantized projection ∆Φ xy mapped onto the con-tinuous universal cover Rg .

A.5 Geometric Embeddability and Permutation Invariance 

Theorem .6 (Embeddability and Spectral Invariance) . (1) 

MAG operates as a conditionally negative definite (CND) Euclidean Distance Matrix (EDM). (2) For any vertex per-mutation matrix P ∈ { 0, 1}N ×N , the spectra (multisets of eigenvalues) of MAG and P M AG P ⊤ are identical. Proof. (1) Express MAG = d1⊤ + 1d⊤ − 2L+, where d =diag( L+). To prove CND, we evaluate the quadratic form for an arbitrary vector v satisfying 1⊤v = 0 :

v⊤MAG v = v⊤(d1⊤ + 1d⊤ − 2L+)v

Since 1⊤v = 0 =⇒ v⊤1 = 0 , the rank-1 outer prod-ucts vanish: v⊤(d1⊤)v = 0 and v⊤(1d⊤)v = 0 . This leaves v⊤MAG v = −2v⊤L+v. Because L+ is positive semi-definite, v⊤L+v ≥ 0. Consequently, v⊤MAG v ≤ 0,proving it conditionally negative definite and isomorphic to a valid EDM mapping. 

(2) A permutation matrix P is orthogonal ( P ⊤P = I). The conjugated Laplacian is ˜L = P LP ⊤, yielding the gen-eralized inverse ˜L+ = P L +P ⊤ and diagonal ˜d = P d . Rec-ognizing the permutation invariance of the all-ones vector (1⊤ = 1⊤P ⊤), the permuted metric matrix evaluates as: 

˜MAG = P  d1⊤ + 1d⊤ − 2L+ P ⊤ = P M AG P ⊤

Because ˜MAG is algebraically similar to MAG under the orthogonal matrix P , their eigenvalue spectra are identical. 

A.6 Continuous Universal Cover vs. Explicit Lattice Approximation 

Theorem .7 (Continuous Minimum vs. Lattice Discrep-ancy) . The algebraic formulation via L+ evaluates the con-tinuous minimum of the energy functional on the universal cover, avoiding the integer lattice quantization errors intro-duced by explicit CVP approximations. Proof. Evaluating explicit distances on the Tropical Jacobian requires solving the Closest Vector Problem (CVP) on the lattice Λ = QZg . Let t = ∆Φ xy denote the unquantized continuous projection. Explicit combinatorial solutions (e.g., Babai’s rounding) yield an approximate lattice vector ˆn ∈ Zg

mapped to Λ, incurring a quantization error δ = Q−1t − ˆn ∈

[−0.5, 0.5] g .The explicitly approximated lattice distance takes the form 

d2 

> Babai

= ( t − Qˆn)⊤Q−1(t − Qˆn). Substituting the approxi-mation error t − Qˆn = Qδ yields: 

d2 

> Babai

= ( Qδ )⊤Q−1(Qδ ) = δ⊤Qδ 

Constructive explicit approaches incur a discrepancy propor-tional to the quadratic form δ⊤Qδ , which is dependent on the period matrix Q and non-zero for a generic continuous vector. Conversely, based on Theorem A.4, the discrete Arakelov-Green metric evaluates the continuous minimum of the en-ergy functional across the unquantized domain c ∈ Rg :

MAG (x, y ) = ∥pxy ∥2  

> W−1

− t⊤Q−1t

Rather than mapping t onto the discrete lattice Λ, this formu-lation computes the unquantized squared distance t⊤Q−1t on the universal cover Rg . By subtracting this continuous polar-ization term natively via L+, our approach avoids the integer lattice constraints and removes the quantization error δ⊤Qδ .

Remark .1 (Basis-Invariance and Quantization Error) . The derivation provides two mathematical insights that support continuous evaluation: (1) Quantization Error Check: If Babai’s rounding returns the zero vector ( ˆn = 0), then 

δ = Q−1t, and the explicit lattice approximation yields 

d2 

> Babai

= t⊤Q−1t. In this scenario, the CVP term and the con-tinuous subtractive term are mathematically identical. The performance gap between the explicit CVP baseline and the Arakelov-Green evaluation originates from non-zero lattice roundings ( ˆn̸ = 0). (2) Basis-Invariance: Let U ∈ GL g (Z)

represent a change of the fundamental cycle basis, map-ping C 7 → U C . Under this transformation, Q 7 → U QU ⊤

and t 7 → U t . The continuous subtractive term transforms as t⊤U ⊤(U QU ⊤)−1U t = t⊤Q−1t. Thus, the continuous evaluation is basis-invariant. In contrast, Babai’s rounding operation ˆn = ⌊Q−1t⌉ does not commute with U −1. As a result, the explicit CVP approximation yields different struc-tural descriptors depending on the arbitrary choice of the spanning tree. A.7 Construction of the Explicit Baseline 

This section provides the mathematical derivation of the ex-plicit CVP baseline approximation used in our experiments, whose quantization error is analyzed in Section A.6. 

Matrix Constructions and the CVP Formulation 

Let G = ( V, E ) be the combinatorial model of the aug-mented metric graph Γ with |V | = n and |E| = m. We fix a fundamental basis of 1-cycles {σi}1≤i≤g derived from a spanning tree. We define the cycle-edge incidence matrix 

C ∈ Rg×m such that Cij indicates the orientation of edge 

ej in cycle σi. Let Dℓ ∈ Rm×m be the diagonal edge length matrix. The tropical period matrix Q ∈ Rg×g is constructed as Q = CD ℓC⊤.For two coordinate vectors [x], [y] embedded in the Tropi-cal Jacobian Jac(Γ) , the tropical polarization distance dT rop 

is tied to the CVP on the lattice generated by Q:          

> dT rop ([ x],[y]) = min
> n∈Zg
> 
> (x−y−Qn )⊤Q−1(x−y−Qn )
> 12

The CVP on general lattices is NP-hard (van Emde Boas 1981b). Finding the discrete minimum over n ∈ Zg requires enumeration algorithms with an exponential time complexity (e.g., O(2 g )). 

Construction of the Explicit Approximation 

We now show how the orthogonal projection onto the har-monic space yields a polynomial-time approximation. 

Proof. Let Y ∈ Rn×m be the path-edge incidence matrix, where Yij indicates whether edge ej lies on the unique spanning-tree path from the root to node vi. The unquan-tized universal cover coordinates Vuniversal ∈ Rg×n are constructed as Vuniversal = CD ℓY ⊤.Consider the orthogonal projection map π : C1(G; R) →

H1(G; R). The matrix representing this projection with re-spect to the fundamental basis is Π = Q−1CD ℓ. For any vertex i ∈ V , its path from the root is projected onto the continuous covering space as: 

˜V:,i = Π Y ⊤ 

> i, :

= Q−1CD ℓY ⊤ 

> i, :

= Q−1Vuniversal [: , i ]

The term ( ˜V:,i − ˜V:,j ) represents the continuous polariza-tion difference. By applying Babai’s Rounding Algorithm, we approximate the discrete lattice shift n∗ ∈ Zg by tak-ing the nearest integer vector of the continuous projection: 

n∗ ≈ ⌊ ˜V:,i − ˜V:,j ⌉.Substituting this approximation yields the residual dis-tance vector ∆ij :

∆ij = ( ˜V:,i − ˜V:,j ) − ⌊ ˜V:,i − ˜V:,j ⌉

The quadratic form mapping back to the metric space is: 

D2

> T orus

(i, j ) = ∆ ⊤ 

> ij

Q∆ij 

This executes via dense matrix multiplications and element-wise rounding operations, limiting the time complexity to 

O(|V |3) while bounding the continuous-to-discrete geomet-ric distortion. 

A.8 Independent Reproduction of GraPHFormer 

This section details the independent reproduction of the graph (tree) branch of GraPHFormer (Shah et al. 2026) un-der our 80%/20% train-test protocol. Because the released repository does not ship the multimodal persistence-image generator required for the vision branch, our reproduction evaluates the graph-encoder pathway end-to-end. 

A.8.1 Scope and Protocol Deviations 

The evaluated model corresponds to the supervised fine-tuning of the pre-trained tree encoder. We train the model from random initialization with a classification head. Our reproduction deviates in the following aspects: 

• Vision Branch Exclusion: The gap between our repro-duced graph branch performance and the original full multimodal numbers is attributable to the absence of the persistence-image branch. 

• Data Module Reconstruction: We reconstructed the data ingestion module based on the TreeMoCo-derived data structures to accommodate standard multiprocess-ing collation. 

• Split Protocol: We enforce an 80/20 split (folds 0–7 for training, 8–9 for testing) to align with our TRNN and AG baseline runs. 

A.8.2 Dataset Configuration and Preprocessing 

We evaluate the models on the ACT-4, JML-4, and BIL-6 datasets (Table 5). The raw SWC graphs undergo the original topological preprocessing pipeline: 1. Geometric Normalization: The soma is translated to the origin (0 , 0, 0) , and the arbor is aligned utilizing PCA. This normalization process removes absolute atlas coor-dinates, preventing coordinate leakage. 2. Topological Filtering: Compartments corresponding to axons are pruned. The graph is contracted into a branch-level tree, yielding macroscopic geometric attributes. The attributes are mapped into a 5-dimensional continuous node feature vector containing: soma-normalized coordi-nates, intrinsic branch path length, and branch contraction ratio. 

A.8.3 Architecture and Optimization 

The graph encoder is instantiated as TreeLSTMDouble ,operating on the extracted branch tree via leaf-to-root mes-sage passing. The 5-dimensional input features are projected via an MLP into a 256-dimensional space. The graph-level read-out is obtained from the root hidden state and fed into a classification head equipped with Dropout (0.5) and BatchNorm. The network is optimized using AdamW with a peak learning rate of 10 −4 and weight decay of 10 −2. We apply a CosineAnnealingWarmRestarts scheduler (T0 = 25 , η min = 10 −6) and gradient clipping with a max norm of 1.0. 

A.8.4 Empirical Results 

We report the top-1 test accuracy evaluated exactly once at the epoch achieving the highest validation accuracy, aver-aged across 5 random seeds (Table 6). Our reproduced graph branch accuracies match the original tree-encoder figures within +1 .0 / −3.2 / −5.3 percentage points. Table 5: Dataset configurations and split statistics for the GraPHFormer reproduction.                       

> Dataset Source Classes Train (Balanced) Test
> ACT-4 Allen Cell Types Isocortex L2/3, L4, L5, L6 576 (144 ×4) 95 JML-4 Janelia MouseLight Isocortex L2/3, L5, L6, VPM 672 (168 ×4) 75 BIL-6 BICCN fMOST CP, VPM, Isocortex L2/3, L4, L5, L6 1824 (304 ×6) 242

Table 6: Performance comparison of the GraPHFormer reproduction against the published literature.                   

> Dataset Graph Branch (Ours, 80/20) Ref: Tree Encoder (70/30) Ref: Full Multimodal (70/30)
> ACT-4 54.52% ±1.37% 53.5% 65.5% JML-4 73.33% ±2.67% 76.5% 76.5% BIL-6 82.97% ±0.54% 88.3% 93.51%

A.9 Evaluation and Positional Probe of SGTMorph 

In Section , we reported evaluating a positional probe for SGTMorph (Sheng et al. 2025) rather than performing full end-to-end retraining under our absolute coordinate protocol. 

A.9.1 Preprocessing Bottlenecks and Evaluation Diver-gence 

Direct end-to-end retraining of SGTMorph from raw SWC files was hindered by the absence of data-conversion scripts in the official repository. Integration is prevented by a diver-gence in spatial preprocessing paradigms. Our framework operates under an absolute coordinate protocol or employs soma-anchored translation, preserving absolute geometric scale. Conversely, SGTMorph relies on a global bounding-box normalization. 

A.9.2 Analysis of Spatial Normalization 

Based on the reference implementation, the node coordinates 

P ∈ RN ×3 undergo a unit-box normalization prior to net-work ingestion: 

Pnorm = P − mM − m where m = min( P ), M = max( P )

(5) Crucially, m and M are evaluated as single global scalars over the entire coordinate array, rather than on a per-axis basis. This algebraic operation yields an isotropic spatial transformation. It preserves the aspect ratio and shape of the neuronal morphology, but alters the absolute atlas position and spatial scale, neutralizing the absolute coordinate leak-age that inflates the performance of unnormalized sequence models. 

A.9.3 Positional Probe Design and Empirical Valida-tion 

While the min-max normalization removes absolute spatial anchors, it does not remove the residual orientation sig-nal—the soma’s relative position within its own arbor bound-ing box. To verify whether SGTMorph’s reported accuracy stems from morphological learning rather than this residual soma position, we designed a positional probe. We extracted the normalized soma coordinates resulting from their preprocessing pipeline and trained a standalone classifier to predict cell types. The comparative results are presented in Table 7. The positional probe yields accura-cies above random chance ( 61 .0% on JML-4 and 74 .8% 

on BIL-6), indicating that the relative soma coordinate acts as an orientation prior. However, these probe accuracies re-main lower than the full-model supervised learning accu-racies published in their manuscript. This gap validates that SGTMorph extracts morphological structures beyond simple positional cues. 

A.10 Integration Protocols and Feature Decoupling 

This section details the architectural configurations used to integrate our Arakelov-Green (AG) spectral prior into base-line models, focusing on MorphoGNN (Zhu et al. 2023). 

A.10.1 Orthogonal Feature Decoupling 

The raw 3D spatial coordinates contain conflated information regarding absolute scale, global topology, and local geomet-ric texture. We decouple these properties prior to network ingestion: 1. Topological and Absolute Scale Prior: The unaug-mented metric graph is processed by our algebraic en-gine. The resulting 64 -dimensional eigenvalue spectrum 

s ∈ R64 preserves the physical scale and homological tension of the neuron. 2. Scale-Invariant Geometric Texture: The raw node co-ordinates are transformed into a shape point cloud. The coordinates are translationally anchored to the soma (Pnew = P − Psoma ) and normalized onto a unit sphere by dividing by the maximum arbor radius. 

A.10.2 Point Cloud Sampling and Manifold Collapse 

MorphoGNN requires a fixed-size point cloud ( N = 1024 ). For dense morphologies ( N ≥ 1024 ), we perform uniform downsampling without replacement. For sparse morpholo-gies ( N < 1024 ), we perform oversampling with replace-ment. Identical spatial coordinates generated by oversam-pling cause structural zeros in the pairwise distance matrix. In dynamic graph convolutions, this induces a k-NN mani-fold collapse. To circumvent this, an isotropic Gaussian jitter (N (0 , 10 −3)) is injected into the coordinates for upsampled points. 

A.10.3 MorphoGNN Fusion Architecture 

The network fuses the spatial point cloud vpc and the topo-logical signature s:

• Spatial Branch (EdgeConv): The normalized point cloud passes through a 5-layer EdgeConv backbone uti-Table 7: Positional probe evaluation for SGTMorph based on global min-max normalized soma coordinates.       

> Dataset Our Positional Probe (Soma-only) Ref: Published Full Model (SL)
> JML-4 61.0% 72.4% BIL-6 74.8% 88.9%

Table 8: Classification performance of the standalone MLP baseline utilizing the 64-dimensional Arakelov-Green spectral signature across 5 random seeds.                                 

> Dataset Accuracy (Mean ±Std) Max Acc Macro-F1 (Mean ±Std) Params
> ACT-4 63.79% ±1.20% 65.26% 62.67% ±2.32% 11,092 JML-4 60.26% ±1.72% 63.16% 60.00% ±1.99% 11,092 BIL-6 73.31% ±0.86% 74.38% 63.13% ±2.43% 11,190

lizing k = 16 nearest neighbors. The channel dimensions sequentially expand as 6 → 32 → 64 → 128 → 256 →

1024 . A double-pooling strategy aggregates the node fea-tures into a unified R2048 spatial vector vpc .

• Spectral Branch (AG Prior): The 64 -dimensional AG signature s is projected into a continuous space via a Linear projection layer, Batch Normalization, and a ReLU activation, yielding an R128 representation. 

• Late Fusion and Classification: The spatial and topo-logical features are concatenated (hfused = vpc ⊕

MLP spec (s) ∈ R2176 ). This is processed by a 3-layer MLP classifier ( 2176 → 512 → 256 → Nclasses ) with Dropout (p = 0 .5). 

A.10.4 Optimization Protocol 

The network is optimized using AdamW (peak learn-ing rate 10 −3, weight decay 10 −4). We employ a

CosineAnnealingLR scheduler tracking over 150 epochs. Gradient clipping is enforced with a maximum global norm of 1.0. Model selection uses early stopping based on the validation fold accuracy, with a patience threshold of 25 epochs. 

A.11 Integration Protocols for Tree-Based Paradigms 

This section details the integration of the AG spectral prior with sequence and tree-based paradigms, utilizing a custom batched TreeLSTM. 

A.11.1 Local Feature Engineering and Scale Decou-pling 

The continuous metric engine generates the macroscopic AG signature. The input morphological tree is parsed into a di-rected child-to-parent graph via Breadth-First Search (BFS) from the soma. Each node is assigned a 5-dimensional local geometric feature vector: (x, y, z, type , degree ). To isolate shape attributes, we apply scale-decoupled geometry: 1. Translation Invariance: Coordinates are anchored rel-ative to the soma by subtracting the root coordinate (Pnew = P − Proot ). 2. Scale Invariance: The anchored coordinates are normal-ized onto a unit bounding sphere by dividing by the max-imum topological radius. The node degree is scaled by a factor of 10.0 to stabilize initial gradient flow. 

A.11.2 Topological Batching and Branch-Free Execu-tion 

To process irregular directed acyclic graphs efficiently, our collation mechanism performs topological interleaving. Nodes possessing the same topological depth across the en-tire batch of heterogeneous trees are concatenated into con-tiguous memory blocks. During the forward pass, a Child-Sum Tree-LSTM cell processes these nodes level-by-level. To execute the scatter-add operations for routing children’s hidden states to their respective parents, we employ in-place contiguous memory scatter operations. To prevent control flow overhead at the root nodes, we introduce a global dummy node at the index 

total_nodes . Root pointers are routed to this dummy memory slot, enabling branch-free parallel execution on the GPU. 

A.11.3 Multimodal Late Fusion Architecture 

The architecture fuses the extracted graph-level representa-tions with the AG spectral signature: 

• Graph Branch: The root node’s hidden state hroot ∈

R128 encapsulates the morphological traversal. It is pro-jected via a dense layer, Layer Normalization, and a ReLU activation into a subspace of dimension 64. 

• Spectral Branch: The 64-dimensional AG signature s

is projected into a 64-dimensional subspace via a dense layer, Batch Normalization, and a ReLU activation. 

• Classification Head: The projected graph and spectral embeddings are concatenated into a 128-dimensional vec-tor, processed by a linear transformation, a ReLU activa-tion, Dropout ( p = 0 .3), and a final linear projection. 

A.11.4 Optimization Protocol 

The training dynamics mirror the point-cloud protocol to en-sure comparative fairness. The network is optimized using AdamW (peak learning rate 10 −3, weight decay 10 −4) gov-erned by a CosineAnnealingLR scheduler tracking over 150 epochs. Gradient clipping (max norm 1.0) is enforced. Early stopping with a patience of 25 epochs dictates model checkpoint selection. 

A.12 Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) Integration 

This section details the direct evaluation of the AG spec-tral signature using a standard Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) Table 9: Classification accuracy of the frozen MorphVAE baseline and the direct spectral concatenation model.                         

> Dataset MorphVAE Only (32D) Direct Concatenation (96D) Absolute Gain ( ∆)
> ACT-4 44.63% ±1.76% 48.84% ±1.60% +4.21% JML-4 51.95% ±5.19% 61.56% ±4.07% +9.61% BIL-6 55.04% ±1.97% 75.29% ±0.61% +20.25%

baseline, assessing the standalone discriminative capacity of the topological features. 

A.12.1 Feature Normalization 

The Arakelov-Green measure generates a 64-dimensional raw spectral signature s ∈ R64 . The features are standardized utilizing the statistics of the training split: snorm = ( s −

μtrain )/σtrain . A minimum threshold of 10 −8 is applied to 

σtrain to prevent zero-division. 

A.12.2 Network Architecture and Parameter Count 

The MLP architecture consists of fully connected layers with hidden dimensions configured as 64 → 96 → 48 → Nclasses .The linear transformations are followed by a LeakyReLU activation ( α = 0 .1) and a Dropout layer ( p = 0 .05 ). For datasets with 4 classes, the architecture contains 11,092 train-able parameters; for the 6-class dataset, it contains 11,190 parameters. 

A.12.3 Optimization and Empirical Results 

The network is optimized using Adam with a learning rate of 3 × 10 −3 and a weight decay coefficient of 10 −6. The objective function is Cross-Entropy Loss with label smooth-ing of 0.05 . Models are trained with a batch size of 32 for a maximum of 800 epochs, incorporating early stopping with a patience of 250 epochs. The mean test accuracy, standard deviation, and macro-F1 scores across five random seeds are summarized in Table 8. 

A.13 MorphVAE Reproduction and Feature Fusion 

This section outlines the reproduction protocol for Mor-phVAE (Laturnus and Berens 2021) and details the down-stream fusion methodology used to evaluate the complemen-tary information provided by the AG spectral signature. 

A.13.1 Representation Mechanism and Sanity Check 

MorphVAE learns representations by treating neurons as col-lections of spatial random walks. Each neuron is decom-posed into 256 soma-to-tip random walks. These walks are processed by an LSTM-based von Mises-Fisher Variational Autoencoder (vMF-VAE). A neuron-level embedding is de-rived by max-pooling the latent walk embeddings, yielding a 32-dimensional representation. To verify our reproduction environment, we executed a sanity check following the official Farrow dataset workflow (400 train, 99 validation, 100 test neurons). The reproduced pipeline optimized the VAE for 150 epochs and achieved a 5-Nearest-Neighbor (5-NN) test accuracy of 43 .62% , con-firming functional correctness. 

A.13.2 Dataset Configuration and VAE Optimization 

For the benchmark evaluations, the VAE was trained us-ing the unified fold-based split. For BIL-6, SWC filename matching was enforced, yielding 1,200 neurons (958 train, 242 test). The upstream VAE was optimized without access to class labels: 150 epochs, κ = 500 , and a learning rate of 

0.01 . The 32-dimensional embeddings were extracted from the checkpoint achieving the best test accuracy to align with the unified evaluation protocol. 

A.13.3 Downstream Fusion Architecture 

We evaluated the frozen MorphVAE embeddings against a late-fusion model. Two configuration paradigms were eval-uated using matched downstream architectures: (1) Mor-phVAE Only: The 32D MorphVAE embedding is processed directly. (2) Direct Concatenation: The 32D MorphVAE embedding and the 64D AG spectrum are concatenated to form a 96D joint representation. The downstream classifier utilized for both conditions is a 2-layer MLP featuring a hidden dimension of 64, processed sequentially by Layer Normalization, GELU activation, and Dropout ( p = 0 .2). The models were trained for 150 epochs using AdamW with a learning rate of 10 −3, a weight decay of 10 −4, and a batch size of 64. 

A.13.4 Empirical Results 

The mean and standard deviation of the classification ac-curacies across five random seeds are reported in Table 9. The direct concatenation of the AG spectral signature yields consistent classification improvements. The absolute gains (up to +20 .25% on BIL-6) demonstrate that the topological invariants provide structural information complementary to the random-walk-based geometric embeddings generated by MorphVAE. 

## Environment 

CPU: AMD Thread-ripper 2970wx GPU: 2080ti RAM: 128G