Title: On the fibers and semi-algebraicity of ReLU neuromanifolds

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.02826v1

Published Time: Wed, 03 Jun 2026 00:10:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
ON THE FIBERS AND SEMI-ALGEBRAICITY OF RELU NEUROMANIFOLDS        

> AXEL FLINTH, STEFANO MERETA, AND MICHELE PERNICE
> Abstract. We study the semi-algebraicity of the neuromanifold Mdof a feedforward ReLU neural network and its symmetries. We prove that Mdis not a semi-algebraic quotient of the space of weights of the network. We introduce and study the notion of honest open subset of the space of weights, where the network does not show any hidden symmetries. Finally, we conjecture that the maximal honest open is always semi-algebraic and prove that in the shallow case it is even Zariski.

Contents 

Introduction 11. Semi-algebraicity in C0(Rd0 ) and abstract semi-algebraicity 42. Honest subsets of weights and hidden symmetries 73. Shallow neural networks 10 References 13 

Introduction 

A machine learning model can be viewed as a map W × X → Y where W is the space of weights, 

X the space of inputs and Y the space of outputs. Given a pair (w, x ) ∈ W × X we will denote its image as fw(x) ∈ Y . Equivalently, we may view the model as a parametrization of functions 

x 7 → fw(x). The space of such functions M := {fw: X → Y | w ∈ W} is called the neuromanifold 

associated to the model. The (supervised) training of a model is an optimization process over the neuromanifold, seeking a function in M that minimizes a chosen loss with respect to a target function. In practical settings, though, this optimization does not happen on the neuromanifold, but on the space of weights of the model, via the parametrization map. This can cause distortions: so called spurious critical points, i.e. critical weights for the composition of the parametrization map with the loss function which are not critical points of the loss function on the neuromanifold. Furthermore, singular and boundary points of the neuromanifold are more prone to be critical points for the loss function, thus knowing the geometry of the latter would give insights on the training dynamic. The theoretical algebro-geometric study of neuromanifolds has recently experienced a quick development, under the name of neuroalgebraic geometry (see [ MSM +25 ] for an overview). Thus, algebraic geometry fits in a broader toolkit from all areas of mathematics (probability, statistics, topology, convex geometry, functional analysis, category theory...) that can be exploited in the effort of unveiling the mysteries of the training process, improve its efficiency and eventually reduce its  

> 1
> arXiv:2606.02826v1 [math.AG] 1 Jun 2026 ON THE FIBERS AND SEMI-ALGEBRAICITY OF RELU NEUROMANIFOLDS 2

impact the existing energy infrastructure and the environment (see [ IEA26 ] for a detailed analysis of the matter). The neuroalgebraic geometry of neural networks with polynomial activation functions is already fairly well understood (see for example [ KMMT22 , KMST24 , TKB19 , KSS25 , SMK24 , HMK25 ]). In this case the neuromanifold is an algebraic variety (or more generally a semi-algebraic space) and there is a precise dictionary between the machine learning terminology and algebro-geometric invariants of the neuromanifold (see [MSM +25, Table 1]). For non-polynomial activation functions, little is known about the geometry of the neuromanifold. This motivates the present work, in which we study the semi-algebraicity of neuromanifolds associated to feedforward fully connected neural networks with ReLU activation functions, as well as their (hidden) symmetries. 

ReLU neuromanifolds. In the following, L ∈ N is the number of layers of a neural network and 

dk ∈ N is the width of the k-th layer, for k = 0 , . . . , L . With this notation, we say that the neural network considered is of architecture d := ( d0, . . . , d L). The dimension of its space of weights is 

M := PLk=0 dk(dk−1 + 1) , thus the neural network is a function 

RM × Rd0 → RdL .

Given w ∈ RM the function fw can be represented as a composition 

fw = WL ◦ σ ◦ WL−1 ◦ . . . ◦ σ ◦ W1,

where Wk is an affine transformation Rdk−1 → Rdk and the activation function σ is the rectified linear unit (ReLU for short) given by the coordinatewise application of max( x, 0) .Every function in the neuromanifold Md is a continuous piecewise linear (PL, for short) function 

Rd0 → RdL with finitely many linearity regions, thus Md is a subset of the space of continuous functions C0(Rd0 , RdL ). Conversely, in [ ZNL18 ] the authors prove that for any PL function f : Rn →

Rm there exist L ∈ N and an architecture d = ( d0 = n, d 1, . . . , d L = m) such that f ∈ M d.In our treatement, we furthermore reduce to the case of zero biases (i.e. we will assume that the affine functions Wk are in fact linear functions) and dL = 1 . It is clear that results obtained for 

dL = 1 generalize to any width. Statements obtained for zero bias require a more careful effort in order to be generalized, but we restrict ourselves to this setting for simplicity of presentation. In this setting, addressing the problem of identifiability (i.e. if weights can be uniquely recovered up to trivial simmetries from their image via Φ) for a ReLU neural network of architecture d is equivalent to the study of the fibers of the parametrization map 

Φ : RM → PL ⊂ C0(Rd0 ) w 7 → fw.

Related works. The geometry of ReLU neuromanifolds has been already approached in [ VLL23 ]and [ Mas25 ]. In [ HBDSS21 ] the authors study which functions lie in M, rather than studying global properties of this space. Several works have been devoted to the study of the number of linear regions of the functions produced by a ReLU (and more in general maxout) neural network (see for example [MPCB14 , MRZ22 ]). In [ AM25 ] the authors study, among other things, the geometry of the (Zariski closure of) the image of the maps Φn obtain as composition of the parametrization map with the evaluation on a finite number of points. As convex piecewise linear functions are tropical signomial and dual to polyhedra, in [ BLM24 ] the authors attach several combinatorial objects to a ReLU neural network and study what the properties of these objects can tell us about the network. Finally in [ GLMW25 , GLR23 ] the author study, via topological and analytical methods, the existence and some properties of open subsets of the space of weights where there are no hidden symmetries. ON THE FIBERS AND SEMI-ALGEBRAICITY OF RELU NEUROMANIFOLDS 3

These results are extended and improved in [ GM26 ]. Some of the results of this last work are very similar in spirit to what we present here: the authors use polyhedral geometry and combinatorics, while we approach these problems with algebro-geometric techniques. We want to stress that even if (surprisingly!) some of the terminology they introduce is analogous to ours, we were not aware of their work before its appeareance as a preprint, and we worked completely independently. 

Structure of the paper and results. In Section 1 we investigate the semi-algebraicity of the neuromanifold Md, in the spirit of the program outlined in [ MSM +25 ]. We approach this study in two ways: first by introducing a notion of pointwise semi-algebraicity for subsets of the space of continuous functions C0(Rd0 ), and secondly by studying the abstract semi-algebraicity of the neuromanifold as a quotient of the space of weights. Even though a notion of semi-algebraic subset has never been given for an infinite dimensional space such as C0(Rd0 ), we hint that the neuromanifold should be seen as a pro-semi-algebraic 

space: a categorical limit of the semi-algebraic spaces studied in [ AM25 ] with the name of output varieties . Each one of these is obtained by fixing a finite input set and evaluating the functions in the neuromanifold at these points, it lies inside a finite dimensional ambient space and is semi-algebraic in the usual sense. We believe this observation has practical relevance in the experimental study of ReLU neuromanifolds, as we explain later. Moreover, we address the abstract semi-algebraicity of the neuromanifold. Let us denote as EΦ

the equivalence relation induced on the space of weights RM by the parametrization map Φ. It is a straightforward fact that the neuromanifold, as a set, is a quotient of the space of weights by 

EΦ. This is not true in the category of semi-algebraic spaces, though: the main theorem of [ Sch89 ], states the equivalence between the existence of the geometric quotient RM /E Φ as a semi-algebraic space and that of a semi-algebraic subset of the space of weights with a certain property. Making use of this equivalence, in Section 3 we provide a counterexample to it in this situation, thus 

Theorem 1. The neuromanifold Md of a ReLU neural network is not a semi-algebraic quotient of the space of weights by the equivalence relation induced by the parametrization map. 

In Section 2 we approach the problem of identifiability from an algebro-geometric point of view. We introduce the space P obtained from the space of weights by taking into account the action scaling and permutation (the trivial symmetries). In P, we study what we call honest open subsets, i.e. open subsets over which the fibers of the parametrization are trivial or, in other words, open subsets of P over which the network does not show any hidden symmetry behavior. We state the following conjecture: 

Conjecture 2. For any architecture, the maximal honest open subset of P is a semi-algebraic. Notice that here, as opposed to the context of Theorem 1, we are dealing with semi-algebraicity as a subset of the finite dimensional space of weights, not as an intrinsic notion. The introduction of honest open subsets of the space of parameters allows us to study the algebro-geometric nature of previous results from [GLR23]. Lastly, in Section 3 we restrict to the case of shallow networks, i.e. when L = 1 . Here we provide the promised counterexample to the semi-algebraicity of the neuromanifold as a quotient (Example 29) and prove Conjecture 2 in a particularly strong form: 

Theorem 3. For shallow networks, the maximal honest open subset is Zariski open. 

Acknowledgements. We thank Antonio Lerario for sharing his ideas about the content of Section 1 during his visit to KTH. We also want to thank Kathlén Kohn for bringing this topic to our ON THE FIBERS AND SEMI-ALGEBRAICITY OF RELU NEUROMANIFOLDS 4

attention and Elisenda Grigsby and Giovanni Marchetti for several useful conversations. Part of this work was carried out while S.M. was partially supported by the Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and Software Program (WASP) funded by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation. A.F. also acknowledges support from the Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and Software Program (WASP) funded by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation. 1. Semi-algebraicity in C0(Rd0 ) and abstract semi-algebraicity 

As we already mentioned in the introduction, endowing the neuromanifold with a geometric structure could help immensely when dealing with concrete optimization problems related to minimizing the loss function. For a semi-algebraic activation function, one may wonder if the neuromanifold has a natural semi-algebraic structure. In the case of ReLU, one major difficulty relies in the (still very mysterious) semi-algebraic structure of the space of continuous functions. In what follows, we analyze different ways to think of the semi-algebraicity of a neuromanifold. The first natural approach is to endow the space of continuous function with some infinite-dimensional semi-algebraic structure, so that one can at least show that there is some compatibility between the semi-algebraic structure on the space of weights and that of the space of functions through the parametrization map. We want to remark that it is possible that some of the claims made in this section can be generalized to other activation functions using the notions of tame topologies and o-minimal structures. For the rest of this subsection, we set d := d0 the width of the first layer. 

Definition 4. A continuous map C0(Rd) → R is said to be polynomial if for every finite dimensional vector subspace V ⊂ C0(Rd) the restriction V → R is polynomial (in the usual sense). We can say that a continuous function M → C0(Rd) from a semi-algebraic space M is semi-algebraic if for every polynomial morphism C0(Rd) → R the composition 

M → C0(Rd) → R

is semi-algebraic (in the usual sense). Although the previous one is the most natural definition, we introduce a second (seemingly weaker) definition, which is easier to test. 

Definition 5. Let M be a semi-algebraic space and suppose that we have a continuous morphism 

α : M → C0(Rd) for some positive integer d. We say that α is pointwise semi-algebraic if for every 

v ∈ Rd the composition 

M α

→ C0(Rd) πv

→ R

is semi-algebraic, where the second morphism is the projection πv defined by the association g 7 → g(v)

for every g ∈ C0(Rd).

Remark 6. It is clear that every semi-algebraic morphism M → C0(Rd) is pointwise semi-algebraic. We believe that the converse is also true, but one would need an infinite dimensional version of the Nullstellensatz. ⋄

Checking that the parametrization morphism is pointwise semi-algebraic is straightforward. 

Lemma 7. The parametrization morphism Φ : RM → C0(Rd) associated to a ReLU neural network is pointwise semi-algebraic. Proof. This follows from the usual abstract quantifier argument using the fact that the activation function is semi-algebraic. □ON THE FIBERS AND SEMI-ALGEBRAICITY OF RELU NEUROMANIFOLDS 5

We claim that the pointwise semi-algebraicity may help in endowing the parametrization morphism (and thus the neuromanifold) with a pro-semi-algebraic structure. This is not as strong as a semi-algebraic one, but we argue it could still have be useful for optimization arguments. Let Q be the countable dense subset of rational numbers in R and let q : N → Qd be a bijective map of sets. Consider the limit diagram 

. . . → Rn → Rn−1 → . . . → R

in the category of topological vector spaces and denote by RN the limit (which is the product space with the product topology). Morphisms in the diagram above are just projections forgetting the last coordinate. Moreover, for every n we have a morphism πn : C0(Rd) → Rn defined by the assignment 

f 7 → (f (q(1)) , . . . , f (q(n)) ) and taking the limit we get a morphism π : C0(Rd) → RN which is injective, since two continuous functions which agree on a dense subset agree on the whole space. Notice that the morphism π is the composition of the morphism C0(Rd) → RRd

with the natural projection morphism, where RRd

is the set of all functions Rd → R with the pointwise convergence topology. This alternative point of view allows us to endow the parametrization morphism (and thus the neuromanifold) with the structure of a pro-semi-algebraic map, namely a limit diagram 

RM

. . . Rn Rn−1 . . . R 

> Φn−1
> ΦnΦ1

where Φn := πn ◦ Φ. Hence, the neuromanifold (endowed with the pointwise convergence topology) can be described as the limit of the (affine) semi-algebraic spaces obtained as images of Φn when n

varies, thus it is a pro-object in the category of semi-algebraic spaces. 

Remark 8. A priori, it is not clear whether the neuromanifold is representable by a semi-algebraic space. In algebraic geometry, one can prove the representability of limit diagrams assuming the affineness of the transition morphisms. All the results the authors are aware of in semi-algebraic geometry rely on some uniform boundedness of the presentation of this semi-algebraic spaces, since, by definition, semi-algebraic spaces are locally semi-algebraic subsets of a finite-dimensional vector space (over R). It would be interesting to develop a semi-algebraic theory for Banach spaces, where these objects seem to live naturally. Nevertheless, by denoting as An the image of Φn (which is a semi-algebraic set thanks to Theorem 7), one may argue that An approximates the neuromanifold arbitrarily well as we let n grow. Moreover, there could be a very smart choice for the function q

that makes the approximation faster, depending on the architecture of the neural network. It is worth noticing that for the purpose of concrete computations (for instance in optimization problems), mathematicians (and computers) work with finite amount of data (for instance to estimate the L∞ norm, or in general any loss function), thus it seems natural to study the semi-algebraic sets 

An as computationally tractable approximations of the neuromanifold. Indeed, there are already instances in the literature: in [ AM25 ], the authors study exactly the geometry of (the Zariski closure of) An. Furthermore, although the pointwise convergence topology is coarser than the compact-open topology, for the sake of computations they actually agree, specifically when checking if two functions agree on a finite data set. ⋄

Remark 9. As already pointed out in the previous remark, the algebraic variety An 

> Zar

already appears in the literature: see [ AM25 ]. Therefore one may be tempted to study the pro-algebraic ON THE FIBERS AND SEMI-ALGEBRAICITY OF RELU NEUROMANIFOLDS 6

variety obtained by taking the limit of An 

> Zar

⊂ Rn. Already at the finite-dimensional level though, it is clear that passing to the Zariski closure loses a lot of information: clearly, the Zariski closure of any ball in Rn (no matter how small) is the whole space. Even worse, the limit procedure does not necessarily behave well with taking the Zariski closure. ⋄

Another natural approach is to establish the semi-algebraicity of the neuromanifold abstractly, namely without forcing the image inside the space of continuous functions to be semi-algebraic (in any sense). This is usually done using the language of groupoids. In what follows, we will make parallels with the theory of groupoids (more specifically equivalence relations) in the category of schemes, which brought to the birth of algebraic spaces. Let us start with a very simple observation for topological spaces. 

Remark 10. Let f : X → Y be a continuous map of topological spaces. We can form the equivalence relation on X defined by the subset Ef := X ×Y,f X ⊂ X × X, namely the pairs (x1, x 2) ∈ X × X

such that f (x1) = f (x2). If f is a strict and surjective map (i.e. a subset U of Y is open if and only if f −1(U ) is open in X), then Y is the quotient in the category of topological spaces of X by Ef . ⋄

Inspired by the previous remark, one can try to come up with conditions on a general equivalence relation E ⊂ X × X which imply the existence of the quotient. This is in general very difficult to do, and depending on the geometric structure chosen, there could be different answers. In algebraic geometry, if X is a scheme, we know that flat and finitely presented groupoids give rise to algebraic spaces (or in general algebraic stacks if the morphism E → X × X is not injective). Surprisingly enough, in the semi-algebraic setting the following theorem provides a complete answer to the existence of a quotient in the category of semi-algebraic spaces. This is a direct consequence of Theorem 5.1 of [Sch89], where we specialize to M ≃ RM .

Theorem 11. Let E ⊂ RM × RM be a closed semi-algebraic equivalence relation of RM and let p1

and p2 be the two projections E → RM . The following are equivalent: (i) the geometric quotient RM /E exists in the category of affine semi-algebraic spaces; (ii) there exists a closed semi-algebraic subset K ⊂ RM such that the morphism 

p2|p−11 (K): p−11 (K) → RM

is proper and surjective. 

Notice that we can define an equivalence relation EΦ ⊂ RM × RM on the space of weights consisting of pairs (v, w ) such that Φ( v) = Φ( w). By the usual abstract quantifier argument, it is easy to see that EΦ is a semi-algebraic subset of RM × RM . Moreover, we have the following lemma. 

Lemma 12. Let f : X → Y be a continuous map of topological spaces and let Ef := X ×Y,f X ⊂

X × X be the equivalence relation on X given by f , as above. Suppose that X and Ef ⊂ X × X are affine semi-algebraic spaces, and that the quotient X/E f exists as an affine semi-algebraic space. Then there exists a canonical morphism π : X/E f → Y of topological spaces which is bijective. Moreover, if f is strict and surjective, then π is an homeomorphism. 

Remark 13. It is clear that if the geometric quotient exists as an affine semi-algebraic space, then by Theorem 12 we get that the morphism M ⊂ C0(Rd) is pointwise semi-algebraic. ⋄

Suppose that Φ : RM → im Φ is strict and that M := RM /E Φ exists as an affine semi-algebraic space. Then we could identify topologically im Φ with M, giving the neuromanifold a semi-algebraic structure. Unfortunately, the assumptions above fail even in the case of a shallow neural network, as we show in Section 3 (see Theorem 29). ON THE FIBERS AND SEMI-ALGEBRAICITY OF RELU NEUROMANIFOLDS 7

2. Honest subsets of weights and hidden symmetries 

Even though we cannot endow the neuromanifold with a semi-algebraic structure of a quotient, in this section we try to convince the reader that the study of the neuromanifold as a groupoid in semi-algebraic space can lead to some interesting remarks regarding the singularities of the neuromanifold. These singularities are somehow reflected in the fibers of the parametrization morphism Φ, which can be studied forgetting about the morphism itself and focusing on the groupoid EΦ ,→ RM × RM .Our intent in what follows is to absorb the generic symmetries of a ReLU neural network without changing the image of the morphism Φ, i.e. the neuromanifold. We will focus on the case with no bias, for simplicity. Let d := ( d0, . . . , d L) ∈ NL+1 be the architecture vector of length L as above. Recall that we set 

dL = 1 and that the space of weights 

RM ≃ Mat d1,d 0 (R) × Mat d2,d 1 (R) × . . . × Mat 1,d L−1 (R)

≃ (Rd0 )d1 × (Rd1 )d1 × . . . × RdL−1

is an affine space of dimension M = M (d) = PLi=0 didi+1 in this case. Given an architecture, there exist two type of well-known symmetries (see [AJ21] for a more detailed discussion): (s) scaling: for any neuron in any hidden layer, multiplying the incoming weights and the bias by any positive constant, while dividing the outgoing weights by the same constant; (p) permutation: reordering the neurons in any hidden layer, along with the corresponding permutations of the weights and biases associated with them. Formally, the group of these symmetries can be described as follows. Consider the group 

GL d := QLi=0 GL di (R): we can define an action on Mat d := QL−1 

> i=0

Mat di+1 ,d i (R) by the association 

(A0, . . . , A L) · (M0, M 1, . . . , M L) := ( A1M0A−10 , . . . , A LML−1A−1

> L−1

)

for Ai ∈ GL di (R) and Mi ∈ Mat di+1 ,d i (R).From now on, we will denote by R+ the multiplicative subgroup of R \ { 0} given by the positive real numbers. Furthermore, we will denote by Σi the symmetric group of di-elements. 

Definition 14. We denote by Sc (d) the scaling group (R+)L seen as the subgroup of GL d where we identify the i-th copy of R+ inside GL di (R) as the positive scalar matrices (notice that for i = 0 

and for i = L we are setting the projection map Sc( d) → GL di (R) to be trivial). Moreover, we denote by Pr (d) the permutation group QLi=1 Σi seen as the subgroup of GL d where we identify Σi inside GL di (R) as the permutation matrices (as above, for i = 0 and for i = L we are setting the projection map Pr( d) → GL di (R) to be trivial). Finally, we denote by G(d) the subgroup generated by Sc (d) and Pr (d) inside GL d. The action of G(d) is determined by the action of GL d on Mat d described above. Our first goal is to absorb the scaling group action. In order to do that, we will show that we can consider an open of RM ,without changing the image of Φ. A similar idea has been used in [ ALL18 ]. Let Pd ⊂ RM be the open subset defined as the product 

(Rd0 \ 0) d1 × (Rd1 \ 0) d2 × . . . × (RdL−1 \ 0) dL × RdL .

Notice that the last factor of the product remains untouched. 

Lemma 15. With the notation above, Φ( Pd) = Φ( RM ) ⊂ C0(Rd0 ).ON THE FIBERS AND SEMI-ALGEBRAICITY OF RELU NEUROMANIFOLDS 8

Proof. The idea is essentially that we can move any zero-rows in an original parametrization to be in the final layer. Let 

Pj := 

> j−1

Y

> i=0

(Rdi \ 0) di+1 ×

> L

Y

> i=j

(Rdi )di+1 

where PL = Pd and Pj+1 ⊂ Pj : we will prove that for every 0 ≤ j ≤ L − 1 we have Φ( Pj ) = Φ( Pj+1 ).This clearly implies the statement since 

Φ( Pd) = Φ( PL) = Φ( PL−1) = · · · = Φ( P1) = Φ( P0) = Φ( RM ).

Let 0 ≤ j ≤ L − 1 and (A0, . . . , A L) ∈ Pj \ Pj+1 . Therefore (at least) one of the rows of the matrix 

Aj ∈ (Rdj )dj+1 is the origin of Rdj . Suppose without loss of generality that the first k rows of Aj

are the zero vector for k ≥ 1. Then we can set 

• A′ 

> i

= Ai for every i / ∈ { j, j + 1 };

• A′ 

> j

to be the matrix equal to Aj except for the first k rows, where we can choose any k-tuple of non-zero vectors; 

• A′ 

> j+1

to be the matrix equal to Aj+1 except for the first k columns, which we set to be the zero vector. It is clear now that (A′

> 1

, . . . , A ′

> L

) ∈ Pj+1 and Φ( A′

> 0

, . . . , A ′

> L

) = Φ( A0, . . . , A L). □

Notice that Pd is G(d)-invariant, thus the action restricts to Pd. Moreover, the action of Sc (d) is free on Pd, and in fact 

Pd/Sc( d) ≃ RdL ×

> L−1

Y

> i=0

(Si)di+1 

where we denote by Si the (di − 1) -dimensional sphere. To ease the notation, we set P := Pd/Sc (d).Therefore, since the restriction of Φ to Pd is G(d)-invariant, the neuromanifold is determined by the morphism φ : P → C0(Rd0 ) obtained by taking the quotient by Sc (d), i.e. the restriction of Φ

factors as follows: 

Pd Md

P .

> Φ|Pd
> φ

In other words, we reduced ourselves to study the equivalence relation Eφ ⊂ P × P . Notice that 

Pr( d) still acts on P non-trivially: we get a morphism 

Pr( d) × P −→ P × P 

induced by the projection on the first factor and by the action on the second factor of the product. Since the morphism φ is Pr (d)-invariant, the morphism above actually factors through Eφ ⊂ P × P .Let ρ : Pr (d) × P → Eφ be the induced morphism. We have a commutative diagram of morphisms 

Pr( d) × P Eφ

P

> pr 2
> ρ
> pr 1

where the two diagonal morphisms are the natural projections. We are finally able to give a general definition, which helps us formalizing statements from [PL20], [RK20] and [GLR23]. ON THE FIBERS AND SEMI-ALGEBRAICITY OF RELU NEUROMANIFOLDS 9

Definition 16. Let U be a Pr( d)-invariant subset of P. We say that U is 

• weakly honest if the morphism ρ|U : Pr( d) × U → Eφ ∩ (U × U ) is surjective; 

• honest if the morphism Pr( d) × U → Eφ ∩ (U × P ) is surjective. 

• strongly honest if the morphism Pr( d) × U → Eφ ∩ (U × P ) is an isomorphism. 

Remark 17. Notice that if U is Pr( d)-invariant, then ρ|U factors through Eφ ∩ (U × U ). ⋄

Remark 18. Set-theoretically, the conditions in Theorem 16 can be rewritten using the fibers of the morphism φ. Indeed, given u ∈ U , we have that the fiber of the first projection Eφ → P over u is canonically isomorphic to φ−1(φ(u)) . Therefore we get a morphism ρu : Pr (d) → φ−1(φ(u)) for every 

u ∈ U . Notice that since U is Pr (d)-equivariant, the morphism ρu factors through φ−1(φ(u)) ∩ U .The subset U is weakly honest if for every u ∈ U the group Pr (d) acts transitively on the subset 

φ−1(φ(u)) ∩ U : this says that there are no hidden symmetries of the parametrization morphism φ

when restricted to U . Moreover we say that U is honest if the morphism ρu : Pr (d) → φ−1(φ(u)) is surjective. Equivalently, U is honest if it is weakly honest and U is saturated with respect with the morphism Φ (i.e. Φ−1(Φ( U )) = U ). Finally, we say that U is strongly honest if for every u ∈ U

the morphism ρu is an isomorphisms (which is equivalent to U being honest and the action being free). ⋄

Remark 19. Let us specify what has been proven (at least in some form) in the literature regarding honest subsets: in [ RK20 ] it is proven that, under the Linear Region Assumption , there exists a set whose complement has measure zero and such that it is possible to reconstruct the neural network from the function up to scaling and permutations. Moreover, in [ GLR23 ], the authors prove that there always exists a set of positive measure on which the only symmetries are given by scaling and permutations. It is not clear to us if this positive measure set is a semi-algebraic open. Notably, though, it is proven that this set contains at least an open (showing as a byproduct that the Linear Region Assumption is an open condition in the space of weights), thus their result implies that there always exists a weakly honest semi-algebraic open (since an open ball is semi-algebraic). ⋄

The previous remarks inspired us to state the following conjecture. 

Conjecture 20. The maximal honest (respectively strongly honest) open for a ReLU neural network of fixed architecture is semi-algebraic. Before discussing the conjecture, we want to point out that it is not too hard to convince ourselves that a maximal honest open exists and it is unique (by a simple application of Zorn’s lemma). 

Remark 21. Notice that we state the conjecture for honest open subsets. One may wonder if the condition of being honest is actually an open condition, namely that if ρu is a surjection for u ∈ P ,then there exists an open neighbourhood U of u which is honest. This will imply straightforwardly that the maximal honest subset is open. Even though we do not prove it, we believe that honesty is an open condition. To try to convince the reader, we sketch an idea that could help in proving the claim. Let us discuss the case of strongly honest subsets. The question can be reformulated as follows: suppose we are given a group G, a commutative diagram 

G × P E

P 

> pr
> f
> hON THE FIBERS AND SEMI-ALGEBRAICITY OF RELU NEUROMANIFOLDS 10

and define the subset U := {p ∈ P | fp is an isomorphism } ⊂ P . Is U an open subset? If we work in the category of schemes, G is a finite group and h is separated, the flatness criterion for fibers gives us the openness of U . However, in our setting, P is the parameter space, E is the equivalence relation induced by φ, namely P ×φ P and G is the permutation group. While G is a finite group and P is an affine space (over R), the space of relations is only semi-algebraic a priori. We do not know if the same technique can be used in the semi-algebraic setting. We leave it to the reader as an interesting question. Regarding the honest case, it is even more tricky. Indeed, even in the category of schemes, the openness of the surjectivity of the fiber of f over P does not follow from the assumptions above. ⋄

Remark 22. Notice that it is likely that Theorem 20 is false for maximal weakly honest opens. Indeed, it is not too difficult to convince oneself that, if we do not force the open U to be saturated with respect with the morphism φ, there is no reason to expect the semi-algebraicity of U . ⋄

In the next section, we will study shallow networks and prove that there exists even a Zariski 

strongly honest open subsets, and that this is in fact maximal between honest open subsets. 

Remark 23. We cannot expect to find a maximal honest Zariski open for non-shallow neural networks, as the following example shows. Indeed, it seems that as soon as we leave the shallow network case, there exists a positive measure subset of the space of weights which is not honest. Consider the architecture vector (2 , 2, 2, 1) , whose associated ReLU neural network can be represented by the following diagram where (A, B, c ) ∈ R10 :

R2 A

−→ R2 B

−→ R2 c

−→ R.

Consider now the closed subset of positive measure D defined by the parameters (A, B, c ) such that the matrix B has only negative entries. Then the parametrization morphism Φ sends D to the identically zero function. Since D has positive measure (in fact it contains an open), it cannot exists a Zariski open where the only symmetries are scaling and permutations. Moreover, the counterexample does not really depend on the architecture. We can repeat the same idea as above for the matrix between the second and the third layer of every non-shallow network. ⋄

3. Shallow neural networks 

In this section, we focus on the study of the neuromanifold induced by the simplest architecture possible, the case when L = 1 , i.e. when there is only one hidden layer. These are called shallow 

neural networks. We give a geometric description of the neuromanifold inside the space of continuous functions. We want to remark that we do not claim complete originality here: the description we presented is probably well-known to experts. Nevertheless, it is fundamental to recall some of what follows to the reader to help understand how complex and unbounded the geometry of the neuromanifold can be. Moreover, we prove that the maximal honest open in the shallow case is actually a Zariski open in the space of parameters and we give an example where Theorem 11 does not hold. As above, we will focus on the case of zero bias. Since we are in the shallow case, the parametriza-tion morphism 

Φ : RM −→ C0(Rd0 )

can be described explicitly as follows. As in the shallow case M = d0d1 + d1, a vector in RM can be thought as a pair (A, b ) where A ∈ Mat d1,d 0 (R) ≃ (Rd0 )d1 and b ∈ Rd1 . The function Φ( A, b ) is ON THE FIBERS AND SEMI-ALGEBRAICITY OF RELU NEUROMANIFOLDS 11 

defined by the rule 

x 7 →

> d1

X

> i=1

biσ(ai · x)

where ai is the i-th row of the matrix A and σ is the ReLU activation function. Using the notation and reduction steps described in Section 2, it is enough to study the (image of the) morphism 

φ : ( S × R)d1 −→ C0(Rd0 )

where S := Sd0−1 ≃ (Rd0 \ 0) /(R+) is the (d0 − 1) -dimensional sphere. The morphism φ is Σd1 -invariant, where the action is given by permutation of the d1-fold product of S × R. Notice that since Σd1 is a finite group, if the neural network did not have other symmetries, we would end up with a semi-algebraic quotient (thanks to Theorem 12 and Theorem 11). This is not the case, as we are going to show. We can describe φ as follows: given an element {(vi, b i)} ∈ (S × R)d1 , we have that the function 

φ({(vi, b i)}) is defined as 

x 7 →

> d1

X

> i=1

biσ(vi · x),

analogously to Φ, where all we have done is just restricting the parametrization morphism to the case of unit vectors, since σ is positively homogeneous. 

Definition 24. Given a piecewise linear function f , we denote by Γf the skeleton of f , i.e. the (possibly empty) closed subset of Rd where the function f is not differentiable. The next lemma, although very simple, perfectly depicts the strong non-linearity of piecewise linear functions, which we believe is the reason why the neuromanifold cannot be endowed with a global affine semi-algebraic structure. 

Lemma 25. Let d be a positive integer, b := {bi} ∈ Rd and fi ∈ PL (Rn) be piecewise linear functions with skeleton Γi for 1 ≤ i ≤ d. Suppose that Γi̸ ⊂ ∪ j̸ =iΓj for every 1 ≤ i ≤ d and that 

> d

X

> i=1

bifi = 0 

as a function in C0(Rn). Then bi = 0 for i = 1 , . . . , d .Proof. Fix i and let xi ∈ Rn be a point in Γi \ (∪j̸ =iΓj ). Let us define the operator ∆∇w(−) on a function f for a direction ω ∈ Sn−1 as 

∆∇wf (x) := lim 

> t→0+

(∂−wf (x) − ∂−wf (x + tw )) 

Notice that the operator is clearly linear, thus if we apply it to the linear combination, we get 

> d

X

> i=1

bi(∆ ∇wfi) ≡ 0.

Since fj is linear around xi for every j̸ = i, we get that ∆∇wfj (xi) = 0 for any w ∈ Sn−1. Moreover, since xi is in the skeleton Γi, there exists a w such that ∆∇wfi(xi)̸ = 0. Thus bi = 0 and we can conclude. □

From now on, let us denote by fv the function σ(v · x) for a unit vector v ∈ S. As a corollary of the previous lemma the following holds in the shallow case. ON THE FIBERS AND SEMI-ALGEBRAICITY OF RELU NEUROMANIFOLDS 12 

Corollary 26. Let d be a positive integer, b := {bi} ∈ Rd and {vi} ∈ Sd where S is the (d − 1) -dimensional (real) sphere. Suppose that vi̸ = vj for every i̸ = j and that 

> d

X

> i=1

bifvi = 0 

as a function in C0(Rn). Then bi = 0 for i = 1 , . . . , d .Proof. First of all, notice that Γi := Γ fvi is the hyperplane in Rn whose normal vector is vi.Therefore, Γi ⊂ ∪ j̸ =iΓj if and only if ∃j̸ = i such that vi = ±vj . By hypothesis, there exists at most a unique j̸ = i such that vi = −vj . Therefore, Theorem 25 gives us that it is enough to show the statement for d = 2 and v2 + v1 = 0 . This case follows from direct verification. □

Theorem 26 formalizes the non-linearity of the function σ, stating that any collection of pairwise distinct unit vectors will give rise to a system of linearly independent functions. Moreover, it helps us give a more geometric description of the image of φ: the neuromanifold M

can be described as the union of d1-dimensional hyperplanes Hv in C0(Rd0 ), where v := {vi} varies in Sd1 /Σd1 (remember that the morphism φ is Σd1 -invariant) and Hv is the span of the functions 

fv1 , . . . , f vd1 .

Remark 27. Notice that we can completely describe this intersections of hyperplanes: given the hyperplanes Hv1 , . . . , H vs associated to the sets of unit vectors v1, . . . , vs, we have that Tst=1 Hvt

is the vector space in C0(Rd0 ) spanned by the functions fv where v ∈ ∩ st=1 vt (i.e. the functions associated with the unit vectors that appear in every set vt for t = 1 , . . . , s ). The combinatorial structure of the neuromanifold can be described by a matroid indexed over S. ⋄

In what follows, we will construct a Zariski open subset of P and prove that it is the maximal honest open subset. Let ∆ be the Σd1 -equivariant Zariski-closed in Sd1 defined as 

∆ := {(v1, . . . , v d1 ) | ∃ i, j ∈ { 1, . . . , d 1} such that vi = vj }.

Moreover, let D be the Σd1 -equivariant Zariski-closed in Rd1 consisting of vectors which have (at least) one coordinate equal to 0. Finally, let U0 be the complement of the union of ∆ × Rd1 and 

Sd1 × D inside P ≃ (S × R)d1 .

Proposition 28. With the notation above, the Σd1 -equivariant Zariski open U0 ⊂ P ≃ (S × R)d1 is strongly honest. Proof. Since U0 is in the complement of ∆ × Rd1 , the action of Σd1 is free (thus the map ρ|U is injective), and it is enough to prove that U0 is honest. Let (v, b ) ∈ U0 and (w, c ) ∈ RM such that 

φ(v, b ) = φ(w, c ). This implies we have the following equality 

> d1

X

> i=1

bifvi (x) = 

> d1

X

> i=1

cifwi (x)

for every x ∈ Rd0 . If we set vi := wi−d1 and bi = −ci−d1 for every i = d1 + 1 , . . . , 2d1, we can write the previous equality as 

> 2d1

X

> i=1

bifvi = 0 .ON THE FIBERS AND SEMI-ALGEBRAICITY OF RELU NEUROMANIFOLDS 13 

Setting Ji := {1 ≤ j ≤ 2d1| ni = nj }, Theorem 26 gives us that P 

> j∈Ji

bj = 0 for every i = 1 , . . . , 2d1.Notice that since (v, b ) /∈ ∆ × Rd1 , we have that Ji ∩ [1 , d 1] = {i} for every i ≤ d1. Furthermore, 

Ji ∩ [d1 + 1 , 2d1]̸ = ∅ for every i ≤ d1 because (v, b ) /∈ Sd1 × D. By construction 

> d1

[

> i=1

(Ji ∩ [d1 + 1 , 2d1]) = {d1 + 1 , . . . , 2d1}

which implies that the set Ji ∩ [d1 + 1 , 2d1] consists of exactly one element ji for every i = 1 , . . . , d 1.The association i 7 → ji − d1 defined a permutation σ of the set {1, . . . , d 1} and by construction 

vi = wσ(i) and bi = cσ(i). This concludes the proof. □

As a consequence, we can construct the counterexample anticipated in Section 1. 

Example 29. Consider a shallow feed-forward ReLU neural network with architecture (2 , 2, 1) . We want to show that the morphism φ : ( S1 × R)2 → C0(R2) does not verify the equivalent conditions in Theorem 11. By contradiction, suppose that it exists a closed subset K ⊂ (S1 ×R)2 as in Theorem 11. Consider now any convergent sequence of unit vectors vn → v such that n(vn − v) → 0 and vn̸ = v

for any n. Moreover, consider the sequence of piecewise-linear functions gn(x) := n(fvn − fv ) which is clearly contained in im φ. Then gn → 0, since 

|n(fvn (x) − fv (x)) |≤ |⟨ n(vn − v), x ⟩| ,

indeed, the inequality is clear on the sets where fvn (x) = ⟨vn, x ⟩ and fv (x) = ⟨v, x ⟩ and where they both are zero, and on the sets on which exactly one of the functions is zero, the signs of ⟨v, x ⟩ and 

⟨vn, x ⟩ are different, whence re-introducing the term killed by ReLU will only make the expression bigger. Now, because vn̸ = v, we know that gn ∈ φ(U0), therefore by Theorem 28 the fibers φ−1(gn)

consists of two elements, namely (( vn, n ), (v, −n)) and (( v, −n), (vn, n )) . Since the restriction of φ

to K is surjective and proper on im φ, we know that we should be able to construct a sequence which converges in (S1 × R)2 and maps to gn, up to choosing for every n one of the two elements of fiber φ−1(gn). This is impossible, thus such a closed subset K cannot exists. ⋄

Finally, we conclude with the answer of Theorem 20 in the shallows case. Notice that as we already explained in Theorem 22, the same statement is not true for weakly honest subsets. 

Proposition 30. The Zariski open U0 is maximal among honest subsets. Proof. It is enough to show that for every element u of (∆ × Rd1 ) ∪ (Sd1 × D) the subset φ−1φ(u) is not finite. More precisely, let U be any honest subset of P and suppose that U ∩ (∆ × Rd1 )̸ = ∅. If 

u is any point in the intersection, then φ−1φ(u) ⊂ U since U is honest. As already mentioned, if we prove that φ−1φ(u) is not finite, we get the contradiction (since Pr (d) is finite). By construction, 

u = ( v, b ) ∈ Sd1 × Rd1 such that there exists two distinct indexes i̸ = j ∈ [d1] such that vi = vj .Consider now the elements (v, b ′) such that b′ 

> h

= bh for h̸ = i, j and b′ 

> i

+ b′ 

> j

= bi + bj : by construction 

φ(v, b ′) = φ(v, b ) therefore (v, b ′) ∈ φ−1φ(u). Since the vector b′ varies in a 1-dimensional affine space inside Rd1 , we get that U must be contained in the complement of ∆ × Rd1 . We leave the case of Sd1 × D to the interested reader. □

References 

[AJ21] Marco Antonio Armenta and Pierre-Marc Jodoin. The Representation Theory of Neural Networks. Mathematics , 9(24):3216, 2021. 7 ON THE FIBERS AND SEMI-ALGEBRAICITY OF RELU NEUROMANIFOLDS 14 

[ALL18] Sanjeev Arora, Zhiyuan Li, and Kaifeng Lyu. Theoretical Analysis of Auto Rate-Tuning by Batch Normalization. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning ,volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 242–250. PMLR, 2018. 7 [AM25] Yulia Alexandr and Guido Montúfar. Constraining the outputs of ReLU neural networks. arXiv ,2025. 2, 3, 5 [BLM24] Marie-Charlotte Brandenburg, Georg Loho, and Guido Montúfar. The real tropical geometry of neural networks for binary classification. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2024. 2 [GLMW25] J Elisenda Grigsby, Kathryn Lindsey, Robert Meyerhoff, and Chenxi Wu. Functional dimension of feedforward relu neural networks. Advances in Mathematics , 482:110636, 2025. 2 [GLR23] J. Elisenda Grigsby, Kathryn Lindsey, and David Rolnick. Hidden Symmetries of ReLU Networks. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 11734–11760. PMLR, July 23–29 2023. 2, 3, 8, 9 [GM26] Moritz Grillo and Guido Montúfar. Most relu networks admit identifiable parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.03601 , 2026. 3 [HBDSS21] Christoph Hertrich, Amitabh Basu, Marco Di Summa, and Martin Skutella. Towards lower bounds on the depth of relu neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:3336–3348, 2021. 2 [HMK25] Nathan W Henry, Giovanni Luca Marchetti, and Kathlén Kohn. Geometry of lightning self-attention: Identifiability and dimension. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. 2 [IEA26] IEA. Key questions on energy and ai. https://www.iea.org/reports/key-questions-on-energy-and-ai/executive-summary , 2026. 2 [KMMT22] Kathlén Kohn, Thomas Merkh, Guido Montúfar, and Matthew Trager. Geometry of linear convolutional networks. SIAM Journal on Applied Algebra and Geometry , 6(3):368–406, 2022. 2 [KMST24] Kathlén Kohn, Guido Montúfar, Vahid Shahverdi, and Matthew Trager. Function space and critical points of linear convolutional networks. SIAM Journal on Applied Algebra and Geometry ,8(2):333–362, 2024. 2 [KSS25] Kathlén Kohn, Anna-Laura Sattelberger, and Vahid Shahverdi. Geometry of linear neural networks: Equivariance and invariance under permutation groups. SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications , 46(2):1378–1415, 2025. 2 [Mas25] Marissa Masden. Algorithmic determination of the combinatorial structure of the linear regions of relu neural networks. SIAM Journal on Applied Algebra and Geometry , 9(2):374–404, 2025. 2 [MPCB14] Guido Montúfar, Razvan Pascanu, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. On the number of linear regions of deep neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 27, 2014. 2 [MRZ22] Guido Montúfar, Yue Ren, and Leon Zhang. Sharp bounds for the number of regions of maxout networks and vertices of minkowski sums. SIAM Journal on Applied Algebra and Geometry ,6(4):618–649, 2022. 2 [MSM +25] Giovanni Luca Marchetti, Vahid Shahverdi, Stefano Mereta, Matthew Trager, and Kathlén Kohn. Algebra unveils deep learning-an invitation to neuroalgebraic geometry. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning Position Paper Track , 2025. 1, 2, 3 ON THE FIBERS AND SEMI-ALGEBRAICITY OF RELU NEUROMANIFOLDS 15 

[PL20] Mary Phuong and Christoph H. Lampert. Functional vs. parametric equivalence of relu networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. 8 [RK20] David Rolnick and Konrad Körding. Reverse-engineering Deep ReLU Networks. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 8178–8187. PMLR, July 13–18 2020. 8, 9 [Sch89] Claus Scheiderer. Quotients of semialgebraic spaces. Mathematische Zeitschrift , 201:249–271, 1989. 3, 6 [SMK24] Vahid Shahverdi, Giovanni Luca Marchetti, and Kathlén Kohn. On the geometry and optimiza-tion of polynomial convolutional networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.00722 , 2024. 2 [TKB19] Matthew Trager, Kathlén Kohn, and Joan Bruna. Pure and spurious critical points: a geometric study of linear networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01671 , 2019. 2 [VLL23] Jonatan Vallin, Karl Larsson, and Mats G Larson. The geometric structure of fully-connected relu layers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03482 , 2023. 2 [ZNL18] Liwen Zhang, Gregory Naitzat, and Lek-Heng Lim. Tropical geometry of deep neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 5824–5832. PMLR, 2018. 2