Title: DCRL: Decoupling and Coupling Reinforcement Learning via Policy-Reward Manifold Alignment

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.27572v1

Published Time: Thu, 24 Sep 2026 00:48:46 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# DCRL: Decoupling and Coupling Reinforce-ment Learning via Policy-Reward Manifold Alignment 

Henan Sun 1, Zehua Li 1, Haitao Hu 1, Qifan Zhang 1, Jianfeng Zhang 3, Nuo Chen 1,4 , Jia Li 1,2,* ,

> 1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou), 

> 2

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 

> 3

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 

> 4

Tencent HY 

# Abstract 

Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a key paradigm for improving the reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs). However, existing reward systems, such as rule-based and reward-model-based, often exhibit issues such as unstable optimization and reward hacking. In this work, we revisit the general reasoning of LLMs from a geometric perspective, conceptualizing it as a coupled manifold composed of three interdependent sub-manifolds: logical deduction, evaluation, and representation. Based on this perspective, response generation in RL can be interpreted as a decoupling process from the evaluation manifold, while reward estimation corresponds to a decoupling process from the logical deduction manifold. The limitations of rule-based and reward-model RL systems can be geometrically interpreted as the mismatch of policy-reward manifolds during RL process. To address the aforementioned misalignment, we propose Decoupling and Coupling Reinforcement Learning (DCRL) framework, which incorporates two key components: (1) a syllogistic logic-based prompt evolution mechanism that dynamically refines reward rubrics to enhance the expressiveness of the reward manifold; and (2) a policy–reward re-coupling mechanism that jointly updates the reward and policy models, ensuring consistent evaluation and mitigating manifold mismatch during training. Theoretical analysis and extensive experiments across multiple reasoning domains demonstrate that DCRL consistently outperforms both rule-based and reward-model baselines. Notably, a Qwen3-4B model trained under DCRL surpasses a Qwen3-32B baseline and approaches the performance of a Qwen3-235B model, highlighting superior effectiveness and generalization in RL. 

# 1 Introduction 

Reinforcement learning (RL) has demonstrated substantial performance improvements of large language models (LLMs) (Shao et al., 2024b; Guo et al., 2025). In this paradigm, the parameters of a policy model are iteratively optimized to maximize rewards provided by a reward system (Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Dong et al., 2024; Kaufmann et al., 2023), which may be defined through rule-based mechanisms or learned reward models (Guo et al., 2025; Dong et al., 2024). The efficacy of such a reward system fundamentally depends on its ability to reliably and accurately evaluate the quality of model-generated responses within the context of specific queries (Lambert et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025b; Zhang et al., 2025b). Current reward systems in RL post-training are mainly divided into rule-based systems and reward model systems. Rule-based systems assign rewards through manually designed rules, heuristics, or programmatic verifiers, providing a simple and interpretable mechanism for supervising model behavior (Guo et al., 2025; Feng et al., 2026). However, because such rules are handcrafted, they often fail to accurately capture the true quality of model 1arXiv:2609.27572v1 [cs.LG] 23 Sep 2026 outputs, especially in complex or open-ended tasks, which can cause models to optimize for superficial rule satisfaction rather than genuine performance improvements (Gunjal et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025a; Skalse et al., 2022; Wen et al., 2024). This limitation also makes rule-based systems vulnerable to reward hacking, where models exploit weaknesses in the reward design without improving actual task performance (Chen et al., 2024; Miao et al., 2024). To overcome these issues, recent studies increasingly adopt reward model systems, which learn reward signals from preference data and provide more flexible supervision by implicitly modeling response quality and reasoning quality (Stiennon et al., 2020; Ouyang et al., 2022; Bai et al., 2022; Lightman et al., 2023). Although reward models have shown stronger empirical performance than rule-based methods (Lambert et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025a), they still suffer from optimization instability, since iterative policy updates may exploit inaccuracies in the learned reward models, leading to reward over-optimization and degraded alignment with true task objectives (Rafailov et al., 2023; Skalse et al., 2022; Wen et al., 2024). Therefore, while reward model systems provide a more expressive alternative to rule-based rewards, ensuring their stability and alignment with true response quality remains a major challenge (Lambert et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2025). In contrast to prior studies, we examine reward systems through a geometric lens on the nature of reasoning, conceptualizing it as a collection of coupled manifolds embedded in a high-dimensional space, each associated with distinct reasoning patterns, skills, or strategies (see Fig. 1), inspired by recent progress from the manifold theory (Brahma et al., 2015; Magai & Ayzenberg, 2022). Specifically, pretraining data induces a high-dimensional data manifold M, within which heterogeneous reasoning sub-manifolds—namely, the logical deduction sub-manifold ML (illustrated as the blue surface in Fig. 1 (a)), the evaluation sub-manifold ME (green surface), and the representation sub-manifold MR (orange surface)—are organized into a stratified structure, formally expressed as M = ML ∪ M E ∪ M R. From this perspective, reasoning can be formulated as the interaction among three interdependent sub-manifolds: (i) the logical deduction sub-manifold ML, which is coupled with the model’s policy distribution over M; (ii) the evaluation sub-manifold ME , encoding the implicit judgment functions underlying logical inference; and (iii) the representation sub-manifold 

MR, in which both model responses and evaluation criteria are explicitly instantiated in the text space. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (b), the generation of responses conditioned on a query can be interpreted as a geometric process in which the reasoning manifold effectively decouples from the evaluation sub-manifold, formalized as M ⊥ M E . Conversely, when the model assigns rewards to assess response quality, this corresponds to a geometric process in which the reasoning manifold decouples from the logical deduction sub-manifold, i.e., 

M ⊥ M L. From the geometric standpoint outlined above, existing approaches exhibit several inherent limitations when analyzed through the framework of manifold interactions: 

Limitation 1 : Rule-based reward systems largely disregard the evaluation sub-manifold embedded within the overall reasoning manifold M of the model, thereby limiting their capacity to capture nuanced judgment processes. Consequently, they are particularly susceptible to critical challenges, including poor adaptability to open-ended settings and vulnerability to reward hacking (Skalse et al., 2022; Gunjal et al., 2025; Wen et al., 2024). 

Limitation 2 : Reward model systems typically rely on static reward models whose evaluation sub-manifold does not adapt in tandem with the evolving reasoning manifold of the policy model (Yuan et al., 2024; Wu & Lu, 2025; Xu et al., 2025; Feng et al., 2026). This mismatch can result in several critical challenges, including unstable optimization dynamics, misalignment between reward signals and true task performance, and increased susceptibility to reward hacking (Liu et al., 2025c; Wu et al., 2026; Xue et al., 2026). Observing the aforementioned limitations, we derive two key motivations as following. (M1) :

The reward rubric should evolve dynamically to enhance the expressiveness of reward evaluation. Since the reasoning behavior of the policy model changes continuously during training, a static reward rubric may fail to capture the evolving evaluation criteria required for accurate assessment. By adaptively refining the reward rubric according to the current training state, the reward model can better externalize and calibrate its implicit evaluation standards, thereby producing more precise and reliable reward signals. (M2) :

The reward model should evolve jointly with the policy model to preserve evaluation consistency during reinforcement learning. As the reasoning capability of 2Coupled Manifold of LLMs’ Reasoning Ability  

> Mode 1: Generating Responses
> Mode 2: Generating Rewards
> (a) Example of the Coupled Reasoning Manifold (b) Examples of the Two Decoupling Modes

Figure 1: Illustration of coupled reasoning manifold and two decoupling modes. the policy model improves, a static reward model may gradually become misaligned with the policy model’s evolving output distribution, resulting in inaccurate reward estimation. To maintain reliable evaluation, improvements in policy reasoning should be coupled back to the reward model, thereby reducing the mismatch between policy and reward models and ensuring consistent reward supervision throughout training. Based on the motvations above, we propose a novel framework termed decouple-and-couple 

reward modeling system, along with a corresponding reinforcement learning paradigm, 

Decouple and Couple RL (DCRL), inspired by the following motivations. The proposed approach first decouples the evaluation and representation sub-manifolds from the originally entangled manifold induced by the model, then independently optimizes these sub-manifolds via our proposed syllogistic logic prompt-evolving mechanism, and finally re-integrates them through RL-based coupling. This structured decoupling and subsequent coupling process enables more stable optimization dynamics and yields consistent performance improvements. 

Our Contributions. (1) New Perspective. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to investigate reward modeling systems through the geometric nature on reasoning, by conceptualizing the process as the interaction of three coupled sub-manifolds: logical deduction, evaluation, and representation. This formulation provides a principled and theo-retically grounded foundation for the design of our reinforcement learning framework. (2) 

Novel RL System. We propose a novel paradigm termed DCRL, which first disentangles the evaluation and representation sub-manifolds from the originally coupled manifold induced by the model. These sub-manifolds are then independently optimized via a syllogistic logic–based prompt-evolving mechanism, and subsequently re-integrated through reinforcement learn-ing–based coupling. (3) Strong Empirical Performance. Extensive experiments across diverse reasoning domains, including mathematics, code, and commonsense, demonstrate that DCRL consistently outperforms both rule-based and static reward model baselines. Notably, a Qwen3-4B model trained with DCRL surpasses a Qwen3-32B counterpart and approaches the performance of a Qwen3-235B model, highlighting the effectiveness and generalization of the proposed DCRL paradigm for general reasoning. 

# 2 Related Work 

Recent advances in reward modeling for long-form reasoning post-training can be broadly categorized into rule-based systems and reward model systems .

Rule-based reward systems assign reward signals according to predefined heuristic rules or task-specific verifiers, offering a simple and reliable mechanism for reinforcement learning without requiring separately trained reward models. This paradigm has been widely adopted in RL, especially in domains where objective correctness can be automatically verified. For instance, DeepSeekMath (Shao et al., 2024a) employs rule-based rewards derived from symbolic answer matching to reinforce mathematical reasonin. Similarly, Math-Shepherd (Wang et al., 2024a) introduces automatically verifiable step-level supervision 3signals, where rewards are assigned according to rule-based verification of intermediate reasoning correctness. In code generation, CodeRL (Le et al., 2022) leverages unit test execution results as rule-based rewards, where generated programs are rewarded based on whether they pass predefined tests. Extending this paradigm, RLEF (Gehring et al., 2024) uses compiler and execution feedback as deterministic rule-based rewards for reinforcement learning from execution feedback, significantly improving program synthesis performance. 

Reward model systems assign reward signals to model outputs through learned reward models and have attracted increasing attention in reinforcement learning research due to their conceptual simplicity and computational efficiency. This line of work includes outcome reward models, preference models, and process reward models. For example, Skywork-Reward-V2 (Liu et al., 2025a) improves reward modeling through large-scale human-AI collaborative preference data curation, establishing strong open-source reward model baselines. ReasonFlux-PRM (Zou et al., 2025) extends process reward modeling to long chain-of-thought reasoning by introducing trajectory-aware reward supervision. CodePRM (Li et al., 2025) incorporates execution feedback to improve process-level evaluation for code generation tasks. CompassVerifier (Liu et al., 2025b) further enhance scalar evaluation quality by training specialized verifiers for reasoning tasks with objective correctness signals. DeepSeek-GRM (Liu et al., 2025c) proposes a generalist generative reward model trained via Self-Principled Critique Tuning, enabling adaptive reward generation during evaluation. Owing to their efficiency and ease of integration, reward model systems serve as a practical foundation for reward-guided policy optimization. 

# 3 Methodology 

3.1 Motivation 

As illustrated in Section 1, existing reward systems in RL suffer from the following limitations: (1) rule-based reward systems largely ignore the evaluation sub-manifold coupled within the overall reasoning manifold of the model, leading to poor adaptability to open-ended settings and vulnerability to reward hacking. (2) reward model systems suffer from the mismatch between the evolving reasoning manifold of the policy model and the static evaluation sub-manifold of the reward model, leading to the unstable optimization and reward hacking problems. Inspired by the recent progress on the manifold theory (Brahma et al., 2015; Magai & Ayzenberg, 2022), we conceptualize the abstract reasoning ability of LRMs as the coupled manifold illustrated as Fig. 1 in Section 1. In this view, different tasks in RL correspond to distinct patterns of manifold coupling rather than a single unified reasoning process. Specifically, when an LLM generates an answer, it primarily operates through the coupling between the logical deduction sub-manifold and the representation sub-manifold: the model performs step-by-step reasoning in its latent space and subsequently maps this reasoning trajectory into textual form. In contrast, when an LLM evaluates or scores an answer, the process relies on the coupling between the evaluation sub-manifold and the representation sub-manifold, where internal judgment criteria are expressed through natural language outputs. This perspective reveals a fundamental mismatch in standard RL frameworks for LLM alignment. When the reward model or reward rubric is held static, its evalua-tion–representation sub-manifold may gradually become misaligned with the evolving logical deduction–representation sub-manifold of the policy model, leading to degraded reward fidelity and suboptimal optimization. Recognizing that the reward model itself constitutes a sub-manifold of the overall reasoning manifold, we argue that improvements in reasoning induced by RL should naturally extend to the evaluation sub-manifold. This suggests a simple yet effective strategy: directly updating the reward model using the improved policy model, thereby inheriting enhanced reasoning and evaluation capabilities. Furthermore, since the reward signal is ultimately produced through the coupling between evaluation and representation sub-manifolds, improving the expressiveness of the representation sub-manifold can further enhance reward quality. To this end, we propose to explicitly evolve the representation component of the reward model via syllogistic logic prompt-evolving, enabling the model to externalize and refine its implicit evaluation criteria. Together, these insights 4Algorithm 1 Decoupling and Coupling Reinforcement Learning (DCRL)  

> 1:

Input: Pretrained policy model πθ0 , initial reward model rϕ0 with the same parameter weights of the policy model, axiomatic prompts A = {ai}k1

> i=1

, theorem prompts T =

{tj }k2

> j=1

, corollary prompts C0 = {cl}k3 

> l=1
> 2:

for epoch e = 0 , 1, 2, . . . , E do  

> 3:

// Step 1: Sample trajectories  

> 4:

Sample x ∼ πθe (x) 

> 5:

// Step 2: Reward computation via coupled manifolds  

> 6:

Construct rubric prompt: 

Re = A ∪ T ∪ C e (1)  

> 7:

Compute reward: 

rϕe (x) = fϕe (x; Re) (2)  

> 8:

// Step 3: Policy optimization  

> 9:

Compute advantage: 

Ae(x) = rϕe (x) − be (3)  

> 10:

Update policy: 

πθe+1 (x) ∝ πθe (x) exp (ηA e(x)) (4)  

> 11:

// Step 4: Corollary prompt evolution  

> 12:

Update Ce → C e+1 via: 

Ce+1 = gϕ

(Ct, ¯At, Acc t

)

≈ arg max  

> x∼πθe ,C

(1 − λacc )E[Ae(x)] + λacc fθe (x; A, T , Ce) (5)  

> 13:

// Step 5: Domain-level theorem update  

> 14:

if reasoning domain shift detected then  

> 15:

Update T :

T = gϕ

(T , ¯At, Acc t

)

≈ arg max   

> x∼πθe ,T

(1 − λacc )E[Ae(x)] + λacc fθe (x; A, T , Ce) (6)  

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

// Step 6: Parameter coupling  

> 18:

Update reward model: 

ϕe+1 ← θe+1 (7)  

> 19:

end for  

> 20:

Output: Final policy πθE

motivate the proposed DCRL in which both policy and reward models co-evolve through the dynamic coupling of reasoning sub-manifolds, leading to more accurate evaluation and more effective alignment. 

3.2 DCRL Framework 

Building upon the aforementioned motivation, the overall pipeline of the proposed DCRL is illustrated in pseudo code Algorithm 1, which explicitly models and leverages the interaction between different reasoning sub-manifolds. Concretely, DCRL adopts a standard reinforce-ment learning backbone (e.g., GRPO (Shao et al., 2024a)) for policy optimization, while introducing a syllogistic logic–based prompt-evolving mechanism to dynamically refine the reward model. As shown in Eq. (1), we decompose the reward model’s rubric prompts into three hierarchical components: (i) a set of k1 axiomatic prompts A, which encode funda-mental evaluation principles that are universally applicable across reasoning domains (e.g., mathematical, coding, and commonsense reasoning) and remain fixed throughout training; (ii) a set of k2 theorem prompts T , which capture domain-specific evaluation criteria that are invariant within a given domain but can be adapted when transferring across domains; 5and (iii) a set of k3 corollary prompts at 0-th step C0, which are dynamically updated during training based on the current behavior of the policy model, enabling fine-grained and adaptive evaluation. More specifically, following the common standard of RL backbones (e.g., GRPO), we calculate the advantage and update the policy logits illustrated as Eq. (3) and Eq. (4). The corollary prompt at e-th step Ce is updated according to Eq. (5) to maximize the expectation of the corollary prompt conditioned on the advantage and the current training accuracy, where gϕ

(Ct, ¯At, Acc t

) is the prompt-updating operator and fθe (x; A, T , Ce) is the accuracy calculation function. Similarly, if the reasoning domain is shift, the theorem prompt 

T is updated according to Eq. (6). This hierarchical prompt evolution mechanism is designed to enhance the representation sub-manifold of the reward model, thereby improving the fidelity of the evaluation–representation coupling and yielding more accurate reward signals for the policy model. In addition, to mitigate the structural mismatch between the reward model and the evolving policy model, we introduce a parameter synchronization strategy: at the end of each training epoch, the parameters of the reward model are directly replaced by those of the updated policy model, as illustrated in Eq. (7). This operation is motivated by the observation that the reward model, as a sub-manifold of the overall reasoning manifold, should co-evolve with the policy model to maintain alignment between the evaluation–representation coupling and the logical deduction–representation coupling. By combining hierarchical prompt evolution with periodic parameter coupling, DCRL establishes a unified training paradigm in which the policy and reward models are alternately decoupled for specialized optimization and re-coupled for global consistency, leading to progressively improved reasoning performance and evaluation accuracy. 

3.3 Theoretical Analysis 

In this section, we provide the theoretical foundations of the proposed DCRL framework. Our analysis focuses on the alignment dynamics between the reasoning manifold of the policy model and that of the reward model. Specifically, we show that under the proposed reward-policy co-evolution mechanism, the discrepancy between the two reasoning manifolds remains bounded throughout training. This bounded-gap property guarantees that the reward model remains aligned with the continually evolving policy model, thereby improving the stability and reliability of reward estimation. The detailed proof is provided in Appendix A. To formalize this result, we first introduce two assumptions. 

Assumption 3.1 (Prompt Smoothness) . Let TC denote the prompt-induced transformation on the reward reasoning distribution under corollary prompts C. There exists a constant 

L > 0 such that for any two prompt states C and C′,

DKL 

(pT C′ ∥ pT C

) ≤ L∥C ′ − C∥ , (8) where DKL (·∥· ) denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence. This assumption implies that small prompt changes only induce small perturbations in the reward reasoning distribution. 

Theorem 3.2. Let the corollary prompt evolution operator be 

Ct+1 = gϕ

(Ct, ¯At, Acc t

), (9) 

where: (1) ¯At = Ex∼πθt [At(x)] is the average advantage at epoch t, (2) Acc t is the training accuracy at epoch t, (3) gϕ is the prompt rewriting operator implemented by the reward model. Then the prompt evolution step is bounded by a constant δ > 0:

∥C t+1 − C t∥ ≤ δ. (10) Based on the assumption and the theorem above, the discrepancy between the policy reasoning manifold and the reward reasoning manifold is bounded as follows. 

Theorem 3.3. Under Assumptions 3.1 and Theorem 3.2, the reasoning-manifold gap between the policy model and reward model satisfies 

Gt ≤ 2Lδ, ∀t, (11) 

where Gt denotes the symmetric KL divergence between the policy reasoning distribution and the reward reasoning distribution at epoch t.

6Theorem 3.3 indicates that the discrepancy between the reward reasoning manifold and the policy reasoning manifold remains uniformly bounded throughout training. Therefore, the reward model can continuously track the evolution of the policy reasoning process, ensuring stable reward evaluation and preventing manifold drift between the two models. 

# 4 Experiments 

In this section, we present comprehensive experiments evaluating the proposed DCRL framework under diverse reasoning benchmark, including math, code and commen sense reasoning domains. The objective of these experiments is to address the following research questions: Q1 : How does the proposed DCRL framework perform compared to other RL baselines? Q2 : To what extent do the reasoning manifolds of policy and reward models align during the decoupling and coupling process? Q3 : How about the training stability of the proposed DCRL compared to other RL paradigms? Due to page limit, we put part of experiment results and detailed analysis in Appendix B. 

4.1 Experiment Setup 

Benchmarks. We evaluate DCRL on 10 benchmarks across three reasoning domains, as summarized in Table 1. Our evaluation follows a two-stage protocol. Firstly, we conduct in-distribution evaluation on six source benchmarks with training splits: GSM8K and OlyBench for math, CodeContest and LiveCodeBench for code, and BBEH and MMLU-Pro for commonsense. Following prior settings (Zou et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025c), each source benchmark is split into training and test sets with a 9:1 ratio for RL training and in-distribution evaluation. To further assess the generalization capability of DCRL, we introduce out-of-distribution (OOD) evaluation on evaluation-only benchmarks. For each domain, we select one trained policy for OOD testing: the policy trained on OlyBench is evaluated on AIME24 and AIME25, the policy trained in CodeContest on CRUX, and the policy trained in BBEH on GPQA. Evaluation is based on numeric match for math, unit test execution for code, and final answer exact match for commonsense. Additional details are provided in Appendix B.1. 

Models & Baselines. In our experiments, Qwen3-4B is adopted as the policy model and trained under the DCRL framework, denoted as DCRL-4B (ours) in Table 2. We further include Qwen3-4B, Qwen3-32B, and Qwen3-235B (Yang et al., 2025) as zero-shot reference baselines to contextualize the upper-bound performance of DCRL-4B. To systematically evaluate the impact of different reward paradigms in RL, we further incorporate a rule-based reward system, where rewards are defined via handcrafted heuristics, as well as a static LLM-based reward generator that uses Qwen3-4B without rubric-based prompting. In addition, we include three strong and representative baselines from distinct research directions: ReasonFlux-7B (Zou et al., 2025), DeepSeek-GRM-16B (Liu et al., 2025c), and Skywork-Reward-V2 (Liu et al., 2025a)—given their demonstrated effectiveness in general reasoning RL. 

Evaluation Metrics. We report pass@5 for all tasks. Specifically, mathematical reasoning is evaluated by numeric match, code generation by unit test execution, and commonsense reasoning by final-answer exact match. To quantify the alignment between policy-reward reasoning manifolds during training, we employ Linear CKA (Alvarez, 2022) and Procrustes Distance (Kendall, 1984) as the metrics, where higher Linear CKA and lower Procrustes Distance corresponds to more aligned reasoning manifolds of policy and reward models. Detailed explanation about the metrics is illustrated in Appendix B.2. 

Experiment Environment. For reproducibility, we report the hardware and software configurations used in our experiments. All experiments were conducted on a server equipped with an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6240 CPU @ 2.60GHz and 8 NVIDIA A100 GPUs with 80GB memory, using CUDA 12.8. 

4.2 Performance Comparison 

To address Q1 , we conduct a comprehensive empirical evaluation against a diverse set of baselines across multiple benchmarks spanning various reasoning domains, as reported in Table 2. Based on the experimental results, we draw the following conclusions. ( C1 ): The 

7Table 1: Summary of dataset statistics.                                              

> Domain Dataset Training Set Size Testing Set Size OOD Evaluation Criteria
> Math AIME24 –30 ✓Numeric Match AIME25 –30 ✓Numeric Match GSM8K 7,473 1,319 ×Numeric Match OlyBench 1,913 213 ×Numeric Match Code CodeContest 10,521 1,169 ×Unit Test Execution L.C.Bench 656 73 ×Unit Test Execution CRUX –1,598 ✓Unit Test Execution Commonsense BBEH 2,499 279 ×Final Answer Exact Match MMLU-Pro 10,891 1,211 ×Final Answer Exact Match GPQA –198 ✓Final Answer Exact Match

Table 2: Performance comparison of SOTA baselines and the proposed DCRL across Math, Code and Common sense benchmarks. Baselines Math Code Common Sense GSM8K AIME24 AIME25 OlyBench CodeContest CRUX L.C.Bench BBEH MMLU-Pro GPQA Qwen3-4B 92.58 25.0 16.67 10.73 17.28 58.52 11.74 8.95 49.46 48.22 Qwen3-32B 93.9 26.7 20.0 20.2 19.0 64.90 16.6 10.75 58.5 61.92 Qwen3-235B-A22B 96.74 44.18 40.67 54.08 35.79 78.94 42.58 40.75 71.35 67.01 Rule-based 94.81 26.67 20.0 13.88 26.18 59.51 22.14 31.09 60.06 60.75 Static Reward Model 94.54 33.33 30.0 14.27 32.64 68.58 24.37 32.32 60.42 64.75 ReasonFlux-7B 95.43 30.0 33.33 10.90 16.00 69.92 27.44 33.42 66.21 71.72 Deepseek-GRM-16B 92.80 33.33 26.67 20.19 13.11 59.01 23.42 16.49 52.35 66.70 Skywork-reward-v2 93.63 33.33 26.67 16.43 16.51 72.66 29.89 11.11 50.25 62.31 DCRL-4B (ours) 95.59 40.0 36.67 21.12 36.84 79.12 26.95 35.13 71.20 77.27 proposed DCRL-4B surpasses both Qwen3-4B and Qwen3-32B, and approaches the performance of Qwen3-235B, demonstrating the effectiveness of DCRL. As shown in Table 2, DCRL-4B consistently outperforms Qwen3-4B and Qwen3-32B across all evaluated benchmarks and remains competitive with Qwen3-235B. This result highlights the substantial improvement in general reasoning capability achieved by enhancing Qwen3-4B under the DCRL framework. ( C2 ): DCRL-4B also outperforms counterparts based on rule-based and static reward model paradigms, validating the importance of mitigating the misalignment between policy and reward reasoning manifolds. As discussed in Section 1, both rule-based and static reward model approaches fail to adequately address the discrepancy between policy and reward reasoning manifolds during training, often resulting in issues such as unstable optimization and reward hacking. In contrast, Theorem 3.3 provides theoretical support that DCRL effectively aligns these manifolds, thereby leading to improved performance across multiple benchmarks shown in Table 2. 

4.3 Manifolds Alignment Analysis 

To address Q2 , we compare models trained with a static reward system (non-coevolve) against those optimized under the proposed DCRL framework (coevolve) across three representative benchmarks spanning diverse reasoning domains: OlyBench for mathematical reasoning, CodeContest for code reasoning, and BBEH for commonsense reasoning, as shown in Fig. 2. It can be observed that the coevolve setting consistently demonstrates stronger policy-reward manifold alignment than the non-coevolve baseline across all three benchmarks. Specifically, models trained under the proposed DCRL framework achieve generally higher Linear CKA values and lower Procrustes Distance, indicating improved structural similarity and reduced geometric discrepancy between the policy and reward reasoning manifolds. These results suggest that, under the DCRL framework, the reward model is able to adapt more effectively to the evolving reasoning manifold of the policy model during training. This empirical observation is consistent with the theoretical result established in Theorem 3.3, which shows that the divergence between the policy reasoning distribution and the reward reasoning distribution at each training step is bounded by a constant. Such bounded divergence enables the reward manifold to evolve in coordination with the policy manifold, allowing the reward model to provide dynamically appropriate supervision signals throughout training. As a result, 8the policy model receives more accurate and adaptive reward guidance, which ultimately contributes to improved training effectiveness and enhanced reasoning performance. (a) OlyBench  (b) CodeContest  (c) BBEH 

Figure 2: The policy-reward reasoning manifold alignment under DCRL and static reward system settings. 

4.4 Ablation Study 

To address Q3 , we conduct a comprehensive ablation study of DCRL across three repre-sentative reasoning domains: OlyBench for mathematical reasoning, CodeContest for code reasoning, and BBEH for commonsense reasoning. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 3, the red curve labeled DCRL denotes the validation performance of the full DCRL framework throughout the training process. The blue curve, DCRL-SRM , represents the performance of DCRL when the syllogistic logic-based prompt evolution mechanism is replaced by a static reward model, while the green curve, DCRL-RB , corresponds to the variant in which rewards are generated using a rule-based reward system. It can be observed that the full DCRL framework consistently outperforms the two ablated variants across all three datasets, highlighting the importance of mitigating the mismatch between the reasoning manifolds of the policy model and the reward system illustrated in Section 1 and Section 3. In particular, Fig. 3(a) and Fig. 3(b) show that DCRL maintains a steady upward performance trend throughout training, indicating continuous improvements in reasoning capability. In contrast, the performance gains of both DCRL-SRM and DCRL-RB gradually plateau, with their improvement rates slowing significantly as training progresses. This divergence suggests that the decoupling and coupling mechanism in DCRL provides stronger scalability and sustained optimization benefits. 

# 5 Conclusion 

In this work, we introduced a geometric perspective on LLM reasoning by modeling it as a coupled manifold of logical deduction, evaluation, and representation, and identified the limitations of existing RL reward systems as a manifestation of policy–reward manifold mismatch. Building on this insight, we proposed the DCRL framework, which integrates dynamic reward rubric evolution with policy–reward re-coupling to achieve more stable and aligned optimization. Notably, DCRL enables Qwen3-4B to outperform its 32B counterpart and approach the 235B model on the evaluated benchmarks, demonstrating the effectiveness of policy–reward co-evolution. Both theoretical analysis and empirical results across diverse reasoning tasks demonstrate that DCRL consistently improves performance and generalization over conventional rule-based and reward-model approaches. These findings suggest that explicitly modeling and maintaining the structural alignment between policy and reward manifolds offers a promising direction for advancing RL-based post-training of LLMs. 9(a) OlyBench  (b) CodeContest  (c) BBEH Figure 3: The results of the ablation experiment for DCRL. 

# References 

Sergio A Alvarez. Gaussian rbf centered kernel alignment (cka) in the large-bandwidth limit. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 45(5):6587–6593, 2022. Yuntao Bai, Saurav Kadavath, Sandipan Kundu, Amanda Askell, Jackson Kernion, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Cameron McKinnon, et al. Constitu-tional ai: Harmlessness from ai feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08073, 2022. Mislav Balunović, Jasper Dekoninck, Ivo Petrov, Nikola Jovanović, and Martin Vechev. Matharena: Evaluating llms on uncontaminated math competitions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23281, 2025. Pratik Prabhanjan Brahma, Dapeng Wu, and Yiyuan She. Why deep learning works: A manifold disentanglement perspective. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems, 27(10):1997–2008, 2015. Lichang Chen, Chen Zhu, Davit Soselia, Jiuhai Chen, Tianyi Zhou, Tom Goldstein, Heng Huang, Mohammad Shoeybi, and Bryan Catanzaro. Odin: Disentangled reward mitigates hacking in rlhf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07319, 2024. Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021. Hanze Dong, Wei Xiong, Bo Pang, Haoxiang Wang, Han Zhao, Yingbo Zhou, Nan Jiang, Doyen Sahoo, Caiming Xiong, and Tong Zhang. Rlhf workflow: From reward modeling to online rlhf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07863, 2024. Andrew Zhuoer Feng, Cunxiang Wang, Bosi Wen, Yidong Wang, Yu Luo, Hongning Wang, and Minlie Huang. Rlar: An agentic reward system for multi-task reinforcement learning on large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.00724, 2026. Jonas Gehring, Kunhao Zheng, Jade Copet, Vegard Mella, Quentin Carbonneaux, Taco Cohen, and Gabriel Synnaeve. Rlef: Grounding code llms in execution feedback with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.02089, 2024. Anisha Gunjal, Anthony Wang, Elaine Lau, Vaskar Nath, Yunzhong He, Bing Liu, and Sean Hendryx. Rubrics as rewards: Reinforcement learning beyond verifiable domains. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.17746, 2025. Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025. Chaoqun He, Renjie Luo, Yuzhuo Bai, Shengding Hu, Zhen Thai, Junhao Shen, Jinyi Hu, Xu Han, Yujie Huang, Yuxiang Zhang, et al. Olympiadbench: A challenging benchmark for promoting agi with olympiad-level bilingual multimodal scientific problems. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 3828–3850, 2024. 10 Naman Jain, King Han, Alex Gu, Wen-Ding Li, Fanjia Yan, Tianjun Zhang, Sida Wang, Armando Solar-Lezama, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. Livecodebench: Holistic and contam-ination free evaluation of large language models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07974, 2024. Timo Kaufmann, Paul Weng, Viktor Bengs, and Eyke Hüllermeier. A survey of reinforcement learning from human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14925, 2023. Mehran Kazemi, Bahare Fatemi, Hritik Bansal, John Palowitch, Chrysovalantis Anastasiou, Sanket Vaibhav Mehta, Lalit K Jain, Virginia Aglietti, Disha Jindal, Yuanzhu Peter Chen, et al. Big-bench extra hard. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 26473–26501, 2025. David G Kendall. Shape manifolds, procrustean metrics, and complex projective spaces. Bulletin of the London mathematical society, 16(2):81–121, 1984. Nathan Lambert, Valentina Pyatkin, Jacob Morrison, LJ Miranda, Bill Yuchen Lin, Khy-athi Chandu, Nouha Dziri, Sachin Kumar, Tom Zick, Yejin Choi, et al. Rewardbench: Evaluating reward models for language modeling. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025, pp. 1755–1797, 2025. Hung Le, Yue Wang, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Chu Hong Hoi. Coderl: Mastering code generation through pretrained models and deep reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:21314–21328, 2022. Qingyao Li, Xinyi Dai, Xiangyang Li, Weinan Zhang, Yasheng Wang, Ruiming Tang, and Yong Yu. Codeprm: Execution feedback-enhanced process reward model for code generation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025, pp. 8169–8182, 2025. Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, et al. Competition-level code generation with alphacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022. Hunter Lightman, Vineet Kosaraju, Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Bowen Baker, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, John Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Karl Cobbe. Let’s verify step by step. In The twelfth international conference on learning representations, 2023. Chris Yuhao Liu, Liang Zeng, Yuzhen Xiao, Jujie He, Jiacai Liu, Chaojie Wang, Rui Yan, Wei Shen, Fuxiang Zhang, Jiacheng Xu, et al. Skywork-reward-v2: Scaling preference data curation via human-ai synergy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.01352, 2025a. Shudong Liu, Hongwei Liu, Junnan Liu, Linchen Xiao, Songyang Gao, Chengqi Lyu, Yuzhe Gu, Wenwei Zhang, Derek F Wong, Songyang Zhang, et al. Compassverifier: A unified and robust verifier for llms evaluation and outcome reward. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 33454–33482, 2025b. Zijun Liu, Peiyi Wang, Runxin Xu, Shirong Ma, Chong Ruan, Peng Li, Yang Liu, and Yu Wu. Inference-time scaling for generalist reward modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.02495, 2025c. German Magai and Anton Ayzenberg. Topology and geometry of data manifold in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.08624, 2022. Yuchun Miao, Sen Zhang, Liang Ding, Rong Bao, Lefei Zhang, and Dacheng Tao. Inform: Mitigating reward hacking in rlhf via information-theoretic reward modeling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:134387–134429, 2024. Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022. 11 Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances in neural information processing systems, 36:53728–53741, 2023. David Rein, Betty Li Hou, Asa Cooper Stickland, Jackson Petty, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Julien Dirani, Julian Michael, and Samuel R Bowman. Gpqa: A graduate-level google-proof q&a benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12022, 2023. Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathe-matical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024a. Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathe-matical reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024b. Joar Skalse, Nikolaus Howe, Dmitrii Krasheninnikov, and David Krueger. Defining and characterizing reward gaming. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35: 9460–9471, 2022. Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. Learning to summarize with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:3008–3021, 2020. Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Zhihong Shao, Runxin Xu, Damai Dai, Yifei Li, Deli Chen, Yu Wu, and Zhifang Sui. Math-shepherd: Verify and reinforce llms step-by-step without human annota-tions. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 9426–9439, 2024a. Yubo Wang, Xueguang Ma, Ge Zhang, Yuansheng Ni, Abhranil Chandra, Shiguang Guo, Weiming Ren, Aaran Arulraj, Xuan He, Ziyan Jiang, et al. Mmlu-pro: A more robust and challenging multi-task language understanding benchmark. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:95266–95290, 2024b. Jiaxin Wen, Ruiqi Zhong, Akbir Khan, Ethan Perez, Jacob Steinhardt, Minlie Huang, Samuel R Bowman, He He, and Shi Feng. Language models learn to mislead humans via rlhf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12822, 2024. Jiayun Wu, Peixu Hou, Shan Qu, Peng Zhang, Ning Gu, and Tun Lu. Fast-slow think-ing rm: Efficient integration of scalar and generative reward models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.20212, 2026. Xinle Wu and Yao Lu. Reward model routing in alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.02850, 2025. Zhenghao Xu, Qin Lu, Qingru Zhang, Liang Qiu, Ilgee Hong, Changlong Yu, Wenlin Yao, Yao Liu, Haoming Jiang, Lihong Li, et al. Ask a strong llm judge when your reward model is uncertain. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.20369, 2025. Chao Xue, Yao Wang, Mengqiao Liu, Di Liang, Xingsheng Han, Peiyang Liu, Xianjie Wu, Chenyao Lu, Lei Jiang, Yu Lu, et al. Reason only when needed: Efficient generative reward modeling via model-internal uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.10072, 2026. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388, 2025. Weizhe Yuan, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Kyunghyun Cho, Xian Li, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jing Xu, and Jason Weston. Self-rewarding language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10020, 2024. 12 Junkai Zhang, Zihao Wang, Lin Gui, Swarnashree Mysore Sathyendra, Jaehwan Jeong, Victor Veitch, Wei Wang, Yunzhong He, Bing Liu, and Lifeng Jin. Chasing the tail: Effective rubric-based reward modeling for large language model post-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.21500, 2025a. Taolin Zhang, Maosong Cao, Alexander Lam, Songyang Zhang, and Kai Chen. Compassjudger-2: Towards generalist judge model via verifiable rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.09104, 2025b. Jiaru Zou, Ling Yang, Jingwen Gu, Jiahao Qiu, Ke Shen, Jingrui He, and Mengdi Wang. Reasonflux-prm: Trajectory-aware prms for long chain-of-thought reasoning in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.18896, 2025. 13 A Theoretical Proofs about DCRL 

A.1 Theoretical Proof about Theorems 3.2 

To prove Theorem 3.2, we show that the prompt rewriting operator gϕ can only induce a bounded perturbation on the prompt representation in each evolution step. More specifically, let the corollary prompt Ct at epoch t consist of a sequence of nt prompt tokens: 

Ct = {w1, w 2, . . . , w nt }. (12) Each token wi is mapped by the reward model embedding layer to a vector: 

ei ∈ Rd, (13) where d denotes the embedding dimension. The full prompt representation is defined as the concatenation of all token embeddings: 

E(Ct) = {e1, e 2, . . . , e nt }. (14) Thus, the prompt evolution operator gϕ(Ct, ¯At, Acc t) can be equivalently viewed as an operator acting on the prompt embedding: 

E(Ct+1 ) = gϕ

(E(Ct), ¯At, Acc t

). (15) Our goal is to bound the change: 

∥E(Ct+1 ) − E(Ct)∥. (16) At each epoch, the prompt rewriting operator updates the corollary prompt by rewriting part of the prompt tokens. Assume that at most m tokens are modified during one prompt evolution step, where 

m ≤ nt. (17) Let the modified token indices be i1, i 2, . . . , i m. For each modified token, the original embed-ding is eij , and the updated embedding is e′ 

> ij

. Then the prompt embedding difference can be written as the L1 norm: 

E(Ct+1 ) − E(Ct) = 

> m

∑

> j=1

(e′ 

> ij

− eij ). (18) This equation means that the total prompt change is exactly the sum of the embedding changes of all modified tokens. Due to the nature of the trust region in most of RL mechanisms nowadays, every token embedding produced by the reward model can be bounded in norm: 

∥ei∥ ≤ M, ∥e′

> i

∥ ≤ M, (19) for some constant M > 0. For each modified token, by the triangle inequality: 

∥e′ 

> ij

− eij ∥ ≤ ∥ e′ 

> ij

∥ + ∥eij ∥. (20) Substituting Eq. (19) into Eq. (20), we obtain: 

∥e′ 

> ij

− eij ∥ ≤ 2M. (21) Therefore, each modified token contributes at most 2 M to the total prompt embedding change. Then, taking norms on both sides of Eq. (18) and applying the triangle inequality gives: 

∥E(Ct+1 ) − E(Ct)∥ ≤ 

> m

∑

> j=1

∥e′ 

> ij

− eij ∥. (22) Using Eq. (21), we further obtain: 

∥E(Ct+1 ) − E(Ct)∥ ≤ 

> m

∑

> j=1

2M = 2 mM. (23) 14 Thus, the prompt rewriting operator induces a bounded prompt perturbation with upper bound: 

δ = 2 mM. (24) Substituting Eq. (24) into Eq. (23), we obtain: 

∥E(Ct+1 ) − E(Ct)∥ ≤ δ. (25) Since the prompt rewriting operator gϕ modifies at most m prompt tokens in one evolution step and each token embedding norm is bounded by M , the induced prompt perturbation is bounded by the constant 

δ = 2 mM. 

Therefore, the prompt evolution step satisfies 

∥C t+1 − C t∥ ≤ δ, (26) which proves Theorem 3.2. 

A.2 Theoretical Proof about Theorems 3.3 

In this appendix, we provide the complete proof that the reasoning-manifold gap between the policy model and reward model remains bounded under DCRL. At training epoch t, let 

Zπt ∼ pπt (z) denote the latent reasoning representation induced by the policy model, and let 

Zrt ∼ prt (z) denote the latent reasoning representation induced by the reward model. The corresponding reasoning manifolds are defined as the supports of these latent distribu-tions: 

Mπt = supp( pπt ), Mrt = supp( prt ). (27) To quantify the discrepancy between the two reasoning manifolds, define the symmetric KL divergence: 

Gt = DKL (pπt ∥prt ) + DKL (prt ∥pπt ). (28) Our goal is to prove that Gt remains bounded by a constant during the DCRL optimization process. Recall the parameter synchronization strategy from Eq. (7) in Algorithm 1, at the end of each epoch, the reward model parameters are synchronized with the policy model: 

ϕt+1 ← θt+1 . (29) This synchronization ensures that before prompt evolution, the reward model and the policy model share identical parameters. Therefore, the latent reasoning distribution of the reward model before prompt rewriting is identical to that of the policy model: ˜prt+1 (z) = pπt+1 (z). (30) This means that immediately after synchronization, the discrepancy between the policy reasoning manifold and the reward reasoning manifold is zero. After synchronization, the corollary prompts are updated through the prompt rewriting operator: 

Ct+1 = gϕ(Ct, ¯At, Acc t). (31) This prompt update changes the reward reasoning distribution through the prompt transfor-mation operator TC , producing: 

prt+1 (z) = TCt+1 pπt+1 (z). (32) Hence, after synchronization, the only factor that can create discrepancy between the policy reasoning distribution and the reward reasoning distribution is the prompt evolution step. By Theorem 3.2, the prompt rewriting operator satisfies: 

∥C t+1 − C t∥ ≤ δ. (33) 15 This means that the change introduced to the reward prompts at each epoch is limited by the constant δ. By Assumption 3.1, the KL divergence between two reward reasoning distributions induced by two nearby prompts is bounded by the prompt difference: 

DKL 

(prt+1 ∥pπt+1 

) ≤ L∥C t+1 − C t∥. (34) Substituting Eq. (33) into Eq. (34), we obtain: 

DKL 

(prt+1 ∥pπt+1 

) ≤ Lδ. (35) Therefore, the divergence from the reward reasoning distribution to the policy reasoning distribution is bounded by Lδ . Since the prompt perturbation is bounded and smooth, the reverse KL divergence can be bounded analogously: 

DKL 

(pπt+1 ∥prt+1 

) ≤ Lδ. (36) Thus, both directions of the manifold discrepancy are bounded by the same constant. Substituting Eqs. (35) and (36) into Eq. (28), we obtain: 

Gt+1 = DKL (pπt+1 ∥prt+1 ) + DKL (prt+1 ∥pπt+1 )

≤ Lδ + Lδ 

= 2 Lδ. (37) Therefore, 

Gt ≤ 2Lδ, ∀t. (38) This proves that the discrepancy between the policy reasoning manifold and the reward reasoning manifold remains bounded during the entire DCRL training process. 

# B Datasets and Experiments Pre-processing 

B.1 Dataset Pre-processing 

This section provides an overview of the datasets employed in our reinforcement learn-ing pipeline and describes the corresponding preprocessing and normalization procedures implemented in our experiments. The pre-processing framework is designed to preserve the native supervision signals of heterogeneous benchmarks while minimizing noise introduced by output formatting. First, the unified data schema enables a single reinforcement learning framework to process diverse task types. Second, dataset-specific normalization ensures that reward signals reflect semantic correctness rather than superficial output variations. Third, backend fallback mechanisms and prewarm validation improve reproducibility across restricted execution environments. Finally, prompt-level formatting constraints, particularly for mathematical reasoning datasets, improve the robustness of answer extraction. Collectively, these design choices stabilize the cross-dataset reinforcement learning pipeline while preserving the semantic integrity of each benchmark. To ensure compatibility across heterogeneous benchmarks, all datasets are standardized into a unified chat-style representation accompanied by structured supervision metadata. Specifi-cally, the prompt field contains a sequence of chat messages, typically including a user query and an auxiliary system instruction. To maintain consistency during the experiments, identi-cal dataloader constraints are applied to all datasets, including max_prompt_length=6000 ,

max_response_length=6000 , filter_overlong_prompts=True , truncation=error , and random shuffling. The detailed illustration about the benchmarks employed in the experi-ments is presented below. 

GSM8K. GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) is a grade-school mathematical word-problem benchmark consisting of approximately 8.5K instances, designed to evaluate multi-step arithmetic reasoning. In our framework, GSM8K is treated as a mathematical reasoning dataset with numeric-answer supervision. During preprocessing and evaluation, commas and currency symbols are removed from both predictions and labels. 16 AIME24 and AIME25. AIME24 and AIME25 (Balunović et al., 2025) are olympiad-style mathematical reasoning benchmarks derived from the American Invitational Mathematics Examination, where answers are integers in the range [0 , 999]. In our implementation, these datasets are evaluated using an exact symbolic matching verifier with normalization. Any serialized list-like outputs are transformed into canonical scalar forms before evaluation to ensure consistency. 

OlyBench. OlyBench (He et al., 2024) serves as an olympiad-level mathematical reasoning benchmark in our experiments. To facilitate reliable reward extraction, we append an explicit instruction requiring the model to produce the final answer in the format Final Answer: <number> . The processed prompts are cached for efficiency and automatically regenerated whenever the source data or formatting instruction changes. 

CodeContest. CodeContest (Li et al., 2022) is derived from DeepMind’s competitive programming benchmark CodeContests , containing programming problems paired with test cases and problem metadata. Prior to training, a prewarm verification step retrieves a sample problem to ensure that external test-case access functions correctly. During evaluation, public, private, and generated tests are executed under bounded time limits to maintain stable training throughput. 

L.C.Bench. L.C.Bench (i.e., LiveCodeBench) (Jain et al., 2024) is a contamination-aware code generation benchmark composed of recent contest problems from platforms such as LeetCode, AtCoder, and Codeforces. During preprocessing, each problem is converted into the unified prompt format, while the corresponding question_id is stored for test-case retrieval. The resulting dataset is deterministically partitioned into training and validation sets. During reward evaluation, the generated solutions are executed against sandboxed unit tests associated with each question_id .

BBEH. BBEH (i.e., BIG-Bench Extra Hard) (Kazemi et al., 2025) extends the BBH benchmark with more challenging tasks while preserving broad reasoning coverage. Each task is transformed into the unified schema with explicit final-answer prompting, and answer candidates are normalized into canonical forms (e.g., option letters, yes/no responses, or numeric strings) before exact-match evaluation. 

MMLU-Pro. MMLU-Pro (Wang et al., 2024b) is an enhanced version of MMLU featuring more difficult reasoning tasks and ten-way multiple-choice options, thereby reducing bench-mark saturation. In our preprocessing pipeline, both labels and model outputs undergo option normalization, prioritizing explicit final-answer patterns and falling back to option extraction heuristics. The reward signal is determined by exact agreement between normalized option labels. 

GPQA. GPQA (Rein et al., 2023) is a graduate-level multiple-choice reasoning benchmark covering advanced scientific domains such as biology, chemistry, and physics. During preprocessing, incomplete entries are removed, distractor options are randomized, and answer labels are balanced to ensure near-uniform distribution across options. Prompts are then formatted with explicit final-answer instructions before being exported to parquet files. 

B.2 Experiments Pre-processing in Section 4.3 

To quantitatively examine the alignment dynamics between the policy model and the reward model during training, we conduct a step-wise manifold alignment analysis comparing the 

coevolve and non_coevolve training settings. The objective of this experiment is to measure how closely the representation manifolds induced by the policy outputs and reward-model outputs evolve together throughout the proposed DCRL optimization process. Specifically, we adopt two complementary metrics— Linear Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA) and 

Procrustes Distance —to characterize the structural similarity and geometric discrepancy between the two manifolds. 17 Data Collection. For each training configuration, rollout records are collected from the corresponding JSONL logs generated during policy optimization. Each valid rollout record contains the policy response text, the reward-model response text, and the associated optimization indices, including the training step and epoch number. Formally, each record can be represented as: (x(t) 

> i

, y (t) 

> i

, t, e ),

where x(t) 

> i

denotes the policy output, y(t) 

> i

denotes the reward-model output, t is the op-timization step, and e is the epoch index. These records are grouped by task family and then partitioned into two experimental sets corresponding to the co-evolutionary and non-co-evolutionary reward training paradigms: 

Dco , Dnon .

Text Representation Construction. To compare the latent structures of policy outputs and reward-model outputs, both textual responses are transformed into fixed-dimensional vector representations. We employ a two-stage embedding pipeline. First, textual responses are encoded using TF-IDF features, followed by truncated singular value decomposition (SVD) to obtain dense semantic representations. If TF-IDF features are unavailable due to sparsity constraints, a hashed bag-of-tokens embedding is used as a fallback strategy. For each paired sample at training step t, this procedure yields a policy embedding vector 

p(t) 

> i

∈ Rd and a reward embedding vector r(t) 

> i

∈ Rd. Aggregating all nt valid samples at step 

t forms the policy and reward embedding matrices: 

Pt =



(p(t)1 )⊤

...(p(t) 

> nt

)⊤

 ∈ Rnt×d, Rt =



(r(t)1 )⊤

...(r(t) 

> nt

)⊤

 ∈ Rnt×d.

Although the underlying policy and reward reasoning manifolds are not directly observable, their generated textual outputs provide observable projections of the corresponding latent reasoning processes. At training step t, the policy model maps each input query to a response, while the reward model maps the same policy behavior into an evaluative response or judgment. We therefore regard the collections of policy-output embeddings Pt and reward-output embeddings Rt as empirical, output-space approximations of the policy and reward reasoning manifolds, respectively. In this view, each row of Pt or Rt represents one sampled point on the observable projection of the corresponding manifold, and the geometry induced by pairwise relations among these samples reflects how the two models organize reasoning behavior at that step. Consequently, Linear CKA and Procrustes Distance do not measure the full latent manifolds directly, but quantify the alignment between their empirical textual projections, which serves as a practical proxy for analyzing policy-reward manifold alignment during training. 

Linear CKA for Structural Similarity. To measure the structural similarity between the policy and reward manifolds, we compute the Linear CKA score at each training step. We first center the feature matrices: ˜Pt = Pt − 1μ⊤ 

> Pt

, ˜Rt = Rt − 1μ⊤ 

> Rt

,

where μPt and μRt denote the column-wise means. The step-wise Linear CKA score is then defined as: CKA t =

∥∥ ˜P ⊤ 

> t

˜Rt

∥∥2

> F

√∥∥ ˜P ⊤ 

> t

˜Pt

∥∥2

> F

∥∥ ˜R⊤ 

> t

˜Rt

∥∥2

> F

.

A larger CKA t indicates that the policy and reward representations share stronger structural similarity, suggesting that the reward manifold evolves in a manner that better tracks the policy manifold during training. 18 Procrustes Distance for Geometric Alignment. To further evaluate the geometric discrepancy between the two manifolds, we compute the orthogonal Procrustes distance at each step. After centering, the matrices are normalized by their Frobenius norms: ˆPt = ˜Pt

∥ ˜Pt∥F

, ˆRt = ˜Rt

∥ ˜Rt∥F

.

We then solve the orthogonal alignment problem: 

Mt = ˆP ⊤ 

> t

ˆRt = UtΣtV ⊤ 

> t

, Qt = UtV ⊤ 

> t

,

and define the normalized Procrustes distance as: Proc t = ∥ ˆPtQt − ˆRt∥F

√nt

.

This metric measures the residual discrepancy between the two manifolds after optimal orthogonal transformation. A smaller Proc t implies better geometric consistency between the policy and reward manifolds. 

Step-wise Metric Aggregation. For each experimental setting, the two alignment metrics are computed at every valid optimization step: 

{(CKA t, Proc t)}t∈T .

To enable comparison across runs with different absolute step counts, all metrics are plotted against normalized training progress ranging from 0% to 100%. For visualization purposes, a moving average smoothing operation may be applied, while the raw step-level values are retained for statistical analysis. 

Summary Statistics. To summarize the overall alignment behavior over the full training trajectory, we compute the mean CKA and mean Procrustes distance: CKA = 1

|T | 

∑

> t∈T

CKA t, Proc = 1

|T | 

∑

> t∈T

Proc t.

The relative advantage of co-evolutionary reward learning over the non-co-evolutionary baseline is measured by: ∆CKA = CKA co − CKA non , ∆Proc = Proc co − Proc non .

# C Example Prompts for DCRL 

The prompts below are examples for formation curation. 

> Answer using exactly one final line in this format: Final Answer: <OPTION> Where <OPTION> must be one of: A, B, C, D, Yes, No. Example: Final Answer: A Return the final result on the last line exactly as: Final Answer: <number>. Do not add any text after that line.

The prompts below are examples of syllogistic logic system prompt. 

> You are an expert reward model judge for reinforcement-learning reward shaping. Follow the Aristotle three-paradigm hierarchy strictly: [Axioms - immutable and cross-domains] - Axiom 1: Functional correctness has highest priority over style, verbosity, or formatting. ↪→

19 - Axiom 2: Reward must be grounded in the given problem statement and observable solution behavior. ↪→  

> - Axiom 3: Do not use length, position, or model-identity biases when scoring. - Axiom 4: Penalize hallucinated assumptions and unverifiable claims. [Theorems - updatable medium-level rules when reasoning domain is changed] - (none) # dynamically replaced when changing the reasoning domain [Corollaries - updatable tactical heuristics] - (none) # dynamically replaced by runtime Execution-based evaluation is the primary signal; your score is an auxiliary reward. ↪→
> You are a reward model performing decoupling and coupling RL framework for better scoring quality. ↪→
> You must keep axioms immutable and only update theorem/corollary level rules. Current prompt state: {json_current_state} Recent scoring experience samples: {json_experience_samples} Task: 1) Derive scoring experience that can improve accuracy. 2) Keep axioms unchanged. 3) Propose updated theorem and corollary rules. 4) Theorem can only be changed when reasoning domain is shifted; corollary should be tactical heuristics. ↪→
> 5) Return STRICT JSON object with keys: {"theorems": [..], "corollaries": [..], "rationale": "..."} Do not include markdown fences.

# D Limitations 

In this section, we critically analyze the limitations of the proposed DCRL framework, which can be summarized along two primary dimensions: its applicability to agentic RL and its computational overhead. First, regarding applicability to agentic RL, the current formulation of DCRL is primarily designed for RL in the context of LLMs. However, with the increasing prominence of agent-based systems, agentic RL has emerged as a crucial paradigm. Extending DCRL to such settings is non-trivial, as it remains unclear how the proposed framework can be effectively adapted to accommodate the dynamic, multi-step decision-making processes inherent in agentic environments. Second, in terms of computational overhead, the syllogistic prompt-evolving mechanism introduced in this work incurs additional computational costs. Moreover, its performance may be sensitive to the design of prompts and the stability of their updates, potentially affecting the robustness and efficiency of the overall training process. 

# AI Use Statement 

In this work, we used generative AI tool to assist with translation, implement methods with codes and provide feedback on experiments. We have not used generative AI tools for generate synthetic data sets, help develop conceptual frameworks, formulate mathematical claims, provide critical ingredients for proving mathematical claims, assist in the writing of proofs, propose hypotheses, clean the dataset, support qualitative and thematic data analysis and interpret results. We have reviewed all AI-assisted work. For example, LLM-generated code was verified and tested for correctness by 2 authors. We take responsibility for the final content of this work, including text, claims or artifacts produced with the aid of generative AI. 20