Title: Entropy Objectives in Markov Decision Processes

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.21726v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 01:32:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
# Entropy Objectives in Markov Decision Processes 

## S. Akshay 1, Raghav Goyal 1, Aditya Neeraje 1, and Piyush Srivastava 21Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, India. 

> 2

## Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, India. 

Abstract 

We consider the problem of synthesizing control policies that enforce a concentration property on the state distributions of a stochastic system. We present a formalization of this problem in terms of synthesizing strategies for maintaining an entropy-based objective in Markov Decision Processes (MDPs). We first show that even relaxed versions of this problem are complexity-theoretically hard. We then present a sound and (conditionally) relatively complete method to verify and synthesize strategies for such entropy objectives. The main challenge is the non-linear nature of such ob-jectives, and our approach addresses this by exploiting and combining ideas from convex duality and invariant synthesis. We also investigate the role of memory and randomization in ensuring entropy objectives. Finally, we implement our ideas to evaluate our approach empirically on a few illustrative benchmarks. 

# 1 Introduction 

Systems across several application domains can be described in terms of possessing a “state” that deter-mines the probability distribution of the future evolution of the system. In other words, up to stochas-ticity, the state faithfully represents the system. Mathematically, such systems are often modeled as Markov chains. More generally, when the system can be subjected to external control inputs, one needs to use the richer formalism of Markov decision processes (MDPs). One natural view of Markov chains and MDPs is as stochastic dynamical systems on the set of states, where the evolution of the system is described by a stochastic trajectory through the state space. However, there are situations where it is more natural to consider how the probability distri-bution over the possible states evolves with time. For a concrete example, consider a model of drug absorption described in [CKV +11, Section III], where the constructed MDP can be interpreted (infor-mally) as defining the stochastic trajectory of individual drug molecules. However, the measurable quantity here is the concentration profile of the molecules in different states, which corresponds to a probability distribution over these states. Consequently, problems of synthesising controls in such a setting have to be formulated in terms of the evolution of the essentially non-stochastic evolution of the probability distributions, and not in terms of the stochastic evolution of the states. (We note that similar considerations appear to apply more generally when modeling systems that are analogous to chemical kinetics: see, e.g., the discussion in [CTSR17].) This has led to a large body of work that views Markov chains and MDPs as distribution transformers [KVAK10]. A question that arises in the modeling of such systems with MDPs is whether the probability distributions generated by the MDP are always “diffuse”. For example, Chu et al. [CTSR17] only con-sider probability distributions in which the probability masses of all the chemical species are below a threshold. The question of how “diffuse” a model is also important in the context of model selection: Palaniappan et al. [PBP +17] consider low entropy (which is an analytically smoother formalization 1

> arXiv:2606.21726v1 [cs.AI] 19 Jun 2026

of “being diffuse” than simply using a threshold) as a measure of the quality of their discretization schemes. Motivated by such considerations, we consider the problem of deciding whether it is possible to force an MDP to generate only probability distributions that are “not diffuse”/“concentrated”, except possibly for the initial few states. Formally, we consider the problem of synthesizing (or verifying) strategies that ensure that the distribution of the MDP remains far from the uniform distribution. A natural way to formalize this is to maximize the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence (see e.g., [CT06]) from the uniform distribution. Letting 𝑝 (𝑠 ) be the probability of the system being in state 𝑠 , we want maximize 𝐷 KL (𝑝 || 𝑢 ),

where 𝑢 (𝑠 ) · ·= 1  

> |𝑆 |

∀𝑠 ∈ 𝑆 is the uniform distribution. Equivalently, we would like to minimize an entropy objective, namely: minimize 𝐻 (𝑝 ) = −∑︁ 

> 𝑠

𝑝 (𝑠 ) log 𝑝 (𝑠 )

subject to system dynamics constraints given by the MDP transition equations. In this paper, we address the following problems: given a finite-state, discrete-time MDP, an en-tropy objective 𝐻 (as defined above on the probability distribution), and a threshold 𝛾 , is there a strategy under which the MDP starting from some given initial distribution always, except possibly for the first few steps, remains in a distribution whose entropy is at most 𝛾 ? Further, can we synthesize such a strategy when it exists? Finally, if a strategy is given, how hard is it to verify that it satisfies the en-tropy objective as defined above? These problems are special cases of distributional safety objectives on MDPs (as e.g., addressed by [ACMŽ23]), where the problem is to check whether the set of distributions under a strategy remains in a safe set defined using 𝐻 .As mentioned above, the view of MDPs (and Markov chains) as transformers of distributions has been widely studied over the years [KVAK10, KA11, CKV +11, AAGT15, AGV18, DMS14, DMS19, ACMŽ23, ACMZ24, GAXJ24], for reachability, safety and even omega-regular objectives. However, most of these studies restrict the target space to be an affine combination of linear inequalities, and the proof techniques and hardness results, though varied, often depend on the linearity of the objec-tives. Our focus and novelty in this paper is to consider entropy objectives, which means that we have to go beyond linear or polynomial functions to transcendental functions such as logarithms and ex-ponentials. This forms the central challenge that we tackle in this paper. Our contributions are the following: 

• We show that the entropy objective problem is complexity-theoretically hard (more precisely NP-hard). Even more interestingly, we show that we cannot even approximate the answer in polynomial time, unless there is a randomized polytime algorithm for the Boolean Satisfiability problem. This hardness result holds even when the search space for strategies is restricted to the space of memoryless strategies (see Preliminaries for the definition). To the best of our knowl-edge this is the first approximation-hardness result for entropy and even for general distributional objectives for MDPs. 

• Given the hardness result, we develop a template-based invariant synthesis approach to synthe-size strategies along with invariants that ensure a low entropy objective. To do so, we exploit ideas from convex duality and invariant synthesis to reduce the entropy objective to a tractable form. We show that this formulation leads to a procedure that is sound (i.e., any strategy it outputs is guaranteed to satisfy the requirements) and relatively complete (i.e., if there is an affine invari-ant and memoryless strategy satisfying the requirement, the procedure will detect this) assuming the decidability of the theory of reals augmented with exponentials: this decidability result is known to follow from a famous conjecture in transcendental number theory [MW96]. 1 At the 

> 1Our discussion of the results of [MW96] is based on the more easily available exposition by Wilkie [Wil97].

2same time, we show that we can verify whether a candidate strategy and invariant satisfy the entropy objective in time polynomial in the input parameters. Finally, we show sufficient con-ditions for when affine invariants suffice for our entropy objectives, based on ergodicity of the MDP. 

• We next consider the question of memory and randomization for entropy objectives. We show three results. First, memoryless strategies do not suffice for entropy objectives, i.e., in general we may need memoryful strategies to ensure entropy objectives. Second, we consider the extended notion of distributional memoryless strategies, that look at the current (and only the current) probability distribution over all states and choose the next action based on the entire distribution, and show that they are necessary and sufficient to ensure entropy objectives. Third, we show that randomized strategies are more powerful than deterministic strategies for entropy objectives. 

• While our decision procedure is primarily of theoretical interest, we also implement our ap-proach using a state-of-the-art non-linear solver applied to the tractable form we obtain. We show experimental results on a small suite of benchmarks, that validate the theory, as well as demonstrate interesting behaviors and illustrate the potential applicability of these ideas. 

Related Work We are not aware of any work specifically pertaining to keeping the entropy of the distribution over states low at every step of the MDP. However, in the orthogonal setting of path-based semantics, the work of [BLNW14], [CH14] and [SOC +20] considers the related question of maximizing cumulative path entropy, and the rate of change of path entropy, and suggests that these can be used to model and reason about information leakage in security protocols. In these works, the authors essentially use the fact that the addition to path entropy at one step is only dependent on the state you are at, and hence is a reward function for the MDP, allowing ideas from renewal theory to be used. These ideas allow [BLNW14, Theorem 1] to give a closed form for the entropy rate (in Markov chains), dependent only on the percentage of time spent in a state and the local transition probabilities out of the state (which determine the state’s contribution to the entropy rate). These questions are orthogonal to our problem of minimizing distribution-based entropy objectives, and it is not clear how we can reuse any of the renewal theory ideas. For instance, [SOC +20, Proposition 1] prove that to maximize cumulative path entropy, memoryless strategies are as powerful as strategies that keep track of the time, unlike in our setting (see Proposition 15). In [CH14] the authors consider maximizing path-based entropy in interval Markov chains and MDPs, and use a standard Lagrangian dual to show conditional decidability results via Schanuel’s conjecture, similar to what we eventually do. However, the min-max problems are rather different in our approaches, and in fact the approximate variant in their case is shown to be solvable in polynomial time [CH14, Theorem 21]. On the other hand, we show NP-hardness even for our approximation variant. The core difference is that our definition of entropy is distributional , i.e., dealing with entropy of the distributions reached as time evolves. As our definition computes the entropy of distributions reached, it is always finite, while the path-based notion of entropy used in [CH14] as also [BLNW14] (see [CH14, Definition 7]) often evaluates to infinity (for instance for any Markov chain in which every state has transitions to at least two distinct states). All this makes our problems harder and requires stronger duality results and justifies the completely different template-based approach that we take. The idea of template-based synthesis of certificates for safety, termination, reach-avoidance and even omega-regularity objectives for probabilistic systems and programs has been explored in several recent works (see, e.g., [CGG +25, CFG16, CNv17, ACMŽ23, ACMZ24, AGR24]). Similar ideas have also been widely explored in control theory in several works e.g., [PJP07, ST11, AMTZ22]. However, to the best of our knowledge none of these approaches work with entropy objectives. At a high level, we wish to relate template-based synthesis methods, especially synthesis methods based on affine or linear templates, with the use of relaxations in combinatorial optimization. The broad 3idea there is to relax the combinatorial control variables to allow them to take continuous values, so that the resulting optimization problem becomes tractable (often a linear program, or more generally, a tractable convex program). Of course, the resulting relaxed solution may no more be a valid solution to the original combinatorial problem, and one has to then work to translate the relaxed solution back to the original combinatorial domain. Several deep and important results in the theory of approximation algorithms for combinatorial problems are based on analyzing the capabilities and limitations of such relaxations [Vaz03]. The use of templates is motivated by a similar desire to make the search problem tractable; however, here, the search space is shrunk rather than enlarged. We consider the question of developing a theory of the relative power of classes of templates (analogous to the theory of integrality gaps for relaxations of combinatorial optimization problems) to be an important direction for future work. The structure of the paper is as follows. We start with preliminaries in Section 2. We formulate our problem statements in Section 3, along with illustrative examples of entropy objectives. In Section 4 we provide our hardness results, followed by our invariant-synthesis based algorithm in Section 5. Section 6 deals with the question of memory and randomization. We implement our approach and demonstrate experimental results in Section 7 and conclude in Section 8. A few technical details and more experimental results and insights are presented in the Appendix. 

# 2 Preliminaries 

Given a finite set Ω, we denote by Δ(Ω) the set of probability distributions on Ω. For a probability distribution 𝜇 on Ω, we denote by 𝐻 (𝜇 ) · ·= − Í𝑥 ∈Ω 𝜇 (𝑥 ) log 𝜇 (𝑥 ) the entropy of 𝜇 . It is well known that the entropy of a probability distribution 𝜇 is a measure of the uncertainty in a sample drawn from 𝜇 ;in particular, its highest value of log |Ω| is achieved for the uniform distribution, and its lowest value of 0 at trivial probability distributions, i.e., those supported on a single point in Ω. A Markov decision process (MDP) 𝑀 = (𝑆, Act , 𝛿 ) is a triple comprising a set 𝑆 of states , a set Act (𝑠 ) of allowed actions 

for each state 𝑠 ∈ 𝑆 , and a transition function 𝛿 that maps every state-action pair (𝑠, 𝑎 ) (with 𝑠 ∈ 𝑆 

and 𝑎 ∈ Act (𝑠 )) to a probability distribution 𝛿 (𝑠, 𝑎 ) on 𝑆 . A strategy 𝜋 for an MDP is a function that maps, for every time 𝑡 , every state-action history sequence (𝑠 0, 𝑎 0), (𝑠 1, 𝑎 1), (𝑠 2, 𝑎 2), . . . , (𝑠 𝑡 −1, 𝑎 𝑡 −1), 𝑠 𝑡 

to a distribution on the set Act (𝑠 𝑡 ) of actions allowed for the current state 𝑠 𝑡 . A strategy 𝜋 is said to be 

deterministic if its output is always a trivial/Dirac probability distribution. It is said to be memoryless 

if its output depends only on the current state 𝑠 𝑡 . Given an MDP 𝑀 , a strategy 𝜋 for 𝑀 , and an initial distribution 𝜇 0 on the states 𝑆 of 𝑀 , we denote by 𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝑡 ) the resulting distribution of the state 𝑠 𝑡 

at time 𝑡 when the MDP 𝑀 uses the strategy 𝜋 , starting with state 𝑠 0 sampled according to 𝜇 0. Also, 

𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 0) = 𝜇 0 for any strategy 𝜋 . We let Π1 denote the set of memoryless strategies. 

# 3 Entropy Objectives 

Our objective in this work is to synthesize strategies that ensure that the distribution of the MDP remains far from the uniform distribution. To formalize this, we consider a natural notion of distance on probability distributions: the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence. The (asymmetric) KL divergence 

𝐷 𝐾𝐿 (𝑃 ∥𝑄 ) between probability distributions 𝑃 and 𝑄 on the same sample space Ω is defined as 

𝐷 𝐾𝐿 (𝑃 ∥𝑄 ) · ·=∑︁  

> 𝜔 ∈Ω

𝑃 (𝜔 ) log 

 𝑃 (𝜔 )

𝑄 (𝜔 )



. (1) In particular, if U denotes the uniform distribution on Ω, then 

𝐷 𝐾𝐿 (𝑃 ||U) = log |Ω| − 𝐻 (𝑃 ), (2) 4where 𝐻 (𝑃 ) is the entropy of the probability distribution 𝑃 . Thus, we formulate our goal as synthesiz-ing strategies that ensure that the entropy of the state distribution of the MDP remains low. Further, there could be an initial period where the system has not yet settled into low entropy, so we only require the entropy to remain low after an initial warm-up period. We now formalize these notions. Specifically, given the transcendental nature of the entropy objective, having infinite precision is nei-ther practically realistic, nor feasible. Hence, we consider the following robust version. 

Problem 1 (Low-Entropy ). INPUT : An MDP 𝑀 = (𝑆, Act , 𝛿 ), a starting probability distribution 

𝜇 0 ∈ Δ(𝑆 ), an accuracy parameter 𝜖 ∈ ( 0, 1), and a warm-up parameter 0 ≤ 𝐾 ∈ N. OUTPUT : A 

±𝜖 -additive approximation to the minimum, over all strategies 𝜋 , of the maximum value over all times 

𝑡 ≥ 𝐾 of the entropy of 𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝑡 ).That is, we want to compute a value 𝑣 such that: 

| min  

> 𝜋

max   

> 𝑡 ≥𝐾

𝐻 (𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝑡 )) − 𝑣 | ≤ 𝜖. 

In the next section, we show that the following simpler decision version of Low-Entropy is already NP-hard. 

Problem 2 (𝜏 -Apx-Low-Entropy-Decision ). Let 𝜏 > 0 be a fixed approximation parameter. IN-PUT : An MDP 𝑀 = (𝑆, Act , 𝛿 ), a starting probability distribution 𝜇 0 ∈ Δ(𝑆 ), a warm-up parameter 

𝐾 ≥ 0 and a rational threshold 𝛾 > 0. OUTPUT : YES , if there is a strategy 𝜋 for which the maxi-mum value over all times 𝑡 ≥ 𝐾 of the entropy of 𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝑡 ) is at most 𝛾 ; NO if for any strategy 𝜋 , this maximum value is at least 𝛾 + 𝜏 . Otherwise, the algorithm is allowed to output either YES or NO .When 𝜏 = 0, we obtain an “exact” version of the problem, which we refer to simply as Low-Entropy-Decision .We will also be interested in the synthesis variant of the above problems, which asks to synthesize the strategy 𝜋 that gave rise to the YES answer in each case. Before proceeding to our results, we observe that these questions are of a distributional nature, i.e., they reason about the probability distributions reached over time. In particular, they can be seen as a special case of distributional safety [ACMŽ23]: given a “safe” subset 𝑆 ⊆ Δ(Ω) of distributions over the states, we say that a strategy 𝜋 for an MDP 𝑀 with initial distribution 𝜇 0 is 𝑆 -safe if at all times 

𝑡 ≥ 𝐾 , it holds that 𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝑡 ) ∈ 𝑆 (equivalently, the initial distribution 𝜇 0 is then said to be 𝑆 -safe with respect to the strategy 𝜋 after 𝐾 steps). Note that we do not necessarily require that 𝜇 0 itself should belong to the safe set: we only require safety from the 𝐾 𝑡ℎ action onwards. The main difference of the above formulation from earlier works on distributional safety such as [ACMŽ23] is that those deal with safety queries over affine (and sometimes, polynomial) objectives, while the entropy objective as we defined above is intrinsically non-linear and not even captured by polynomials. Let us next give two examples that illustrate entropy objectives in our problem setting. 

Example 3. Consider the MDP 𝑀 1 in Figure 1 with three states, taken from the running example of [ACMŽ23]. Let 𝜇 0 = (1/2, 1/3, 1/6) be the initial distribution, in which state A has probability 12 , state B has probability 13 , and state C has probability 16 .If we wish to minimize entropy, it is intuitive that we should choose action 𝑎 1 always: as the initial probability mass at 𝐴 exceeds 1 

> 𝑒

, any additional probability mass will only decrease its contribution to the entropy. But what is the value of 𝑣 (as defined in Problem 1) for different values of 𝐾 with 𝜖 = 0.01 ? With some computation, one can show that for 𝐾 = 0, 𝑣 ≥ 1.01 , while for 𝐾 = 1, 𝑣 ≤ 0.68 and for 𝐾 = 2,

𝑣 ≤ 0.60 . Further, if we fix 𝛾 = 1, 𝜏 = 0, 𝐾 = 1, numerical experiments using our linear invariant approach (reported in the appendix) also establish that the answer to Problem 2 (i.e., whether there exists a strategy for which the max value of entropy remains below 1) is YES , and that this is achieved by the strategy that always chooses 𝑎 1.

5𝐴 𝐵 𝐶 

𝑎 2, 1

𝑎 1, 1

1

1/2

1/2

Figure 1: MDP 𝑀 1 taken from [ACMŽ23] In the above example, it was easy to identify a strategy that minimizes entropy (increases concen-tration) even if the value of the strategy required some work to compute or bound; but this is not always the case. For instance, in the following, it is a priori unclear what strategy minimizes the entropy or ensures that it is below a certain threshold. 

Example 4. Consider the 4-state MDP 𝑀 2 given in Figure 2, with initial distribution 𝜇 0 = (0.2, 0.4, 0, 0.4).

𝐷 

𝐵 𝐶 

𝐴 

𝑎, 1 𝑏, 1

4/5

1/5

1/2

1/2

1/3 2/3

Figure 2: MDP 𝑀 2

In this example, starting from 𝜇 0, with 𝐾 = 0, suppose 𝛾 = 1.092 , what would be the strategy that ensures that the Low-Entropy-Decision problem answers YES ? With some computation, one can check that a (randomized) strategy that selects action 𝑎 with probability 7/10 indeed ensures this, even though none of the two deterministic strategies do. 

In the rest of the paper, our goal is to address the above defined problems. We first establish complexity-theoretical hardness results, that work even for the approximate variant of the problem. We then provide an affine invariant-synthesis based algorithm with soundness and relative completeness guarantees. Finally, we present a sufficient condition under which such invariants suffice. 

# 4 Hardness 

We now show that the approximate decision version of Low-Entropy is NP-hard, under randomized reductions, even for small enough fixed values of the approximation parameter. More precisely, we prove the following theorem. 6Theorem 5 (Apx-Low-Entropy-Decision is NP-hard ). There exists a positive constant 𝜏 such that if there is a polynomial-time algorithm for 𝜏 -Apx-Low-Entropy-Decision , then NP = RP. 2

Remark 6. As an immediate corollary, we see that Low-Entropy-Decision , the exact version of the problem, is also NP-hard: a polynomial time algorithm for it would imply randomized polynomial time algorithms for SAT. In the proof of Theorem 5, we will need the following computation. 

Observation 7 (Entropy increment by mass transfer ). Let 𝜇 be a probability distribution on a finite set 𝑆 . Let 𝜖 > 0 and suppose that 𝑎, 𝑏 ∈ 𝑆 are such that 𝜇 (𝑏 ) = 0 and 𝜇 (𝑎 ) > 𝜖 . Consider the probability distribution 𝜇 ′ obtained from 𝜇 by transferring an 𝜖 mass from 𝑎 to 𝑏 . Formally, 𝜇 ′ (𝑘 ) = 𝜇 (𝑘 ) for 𝑘 ∈

𝑆 \ { 𝑎, 𝑏 }, 𝜇 ′ (𝑏 ) = 𝜖 and 𝜇 ′ (𝑎 ) = 𝜇 (𝑎 ) − 𝜖 . Then 

𝐻 (𝜇 ′) = 𝐻 (𝜇 ) + 𝜖 log 

 𝜇 (𝑎 )

𝜖 − 1



− 𝜇 (𝑎 ) log 



1 − 𝜖 𝜇 (𝑎 )



≥ 𝐻 (𝜇 ) + 𝜖 log 

 𝜇 (𝑎 )

𝜖 



.

Proof. The equality follows by a direct computation. For the inequality, we use 0 < 𝜖 < 𝜇 (𝑎 ) to get that 

𝜇 (𝑎 ) log 



1 − 𝜖 𝜇 (𝑎 )



≤ 𝜖 log 



1 − 𝜖 𝜇 (𝑎 )



, (3) and substitute this in the equality. □

We now proceed with the proof of Theorem 5. 

Proof of Theorem 5. We start with the following hardness result of [Tre01, Section 2] for MAX-SAT with bounded occurrences of variables. Consider the special case of SAT where each clause has exactly three literals and each variable occurs in at most 𝐵 clauses, and consider for these instances the problem of deciding whether (a) all the clauses are satisfiable, or (b) at most a 9/10 fraction of the clauses are satisfiable. Then, there exists a positive integer 𝐵 such that if there is a polynomial time algorithm for this problem, then NP = RP. We will show that there exists a 𝜏 (depending upon 𝐵 ) such that a polynomial time algorithm for 𝜏 -Apx-Low-Entropy-Decision implies a polynomial time algorithm for Trevisan’s version of MAX-SAT. Combined with Trevisan’s result, this proves Theorem 5. Consider an instance 𝜙 of MAX-SAT of the above kind. Let 𝐶 and 𝑉 denote respectively the sets of clauses and variables of 𝜙 , and define 𝐿 ··= Ð𝑣 ∈𝑉 {𝑣, ¬𝑣 }. We construct an MDP 𝑀 𝜙 whose state space 

Ω = 𝐶 ∪ ˜𝑉 ∪𝐿 , where ˜𝑉 is a marked copy of 𝑉 (so as to distinguish its elements from those of 𝐿 ) defined as ˜𝑉 ··= {var (𝑣 ) : 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 }. The states in 𝐿 are absorbing states: the only allowed action from 𝑠 ∈ 𝐿 is to loop back to 𝑠 with probability 1. For each 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 , there are two allowed actions for var (𝑣 ) ∈ ˜𝑉 : one is to go to 𝑣 ∈ 𝐿 with probability 1, the other is to go to ¬𝑣 ∈ 𝐿 with probability one. For each clause 

𝑐 = (ℓ1 ∨ ℓ2 ∨ ℓ3) in 𝐶 , there are three allowed actions: for 𝑖 ∈ { 1, 2, 3} the 𝑖 th action is to go to ℓ𝑖 ∈ 𝐿 

with probability one. Since all actions in the MDP 𝑀 𝜙 are deterministic, we will denote, by a slight abuse of notation, each action by its (unique) goal state. We also denote the number of clauses as 𝑚 

and the number of variables as 𝑛 . Note also that since each of the 𝑚 clauses has at most three literals, the total number of literals (and hence variables) that can occur in the formula is at most 3𝑚 , so that 

𝑛 ≤ 3𝑚 .  

> 2More concretely, NP = RP means that there is a randomized polynomial time algorithm for SAT that is always correct on satisfiable inputs and correct with probability at least 2/3(over the randomness of the algorithm) on unsatisfiable inputs (see for instance, [AB09, Chapter 7.3] for more details).

7Let 𝐵 be a positive integer as above; without loss of generality, we assume 𝐵 ≥ 10 for simplicity. Let 

𝛼 ··= 1 − exp (− 100 𝐵 2) ≥ 1/2 and 𝛽 ··= 1 − 𝛼 

be positive constants. Consider the initial distribution 𝜇 0, supported on 𝑆 ∪ ˜𝑉 , which assigns weight 𝛼 𝑛 

to each element of ˜𝑉 and weight 𝛽 𝑚 to each element of 𝐶 .A simple consequence of the construction of 𝑀 𝜙 is that for any strategy 𝜋 , the distribution 𝑀 𝜋 𝜙 (𝜇 0, 1)

after the first action remains the same at all subsequent times. Thus, we only need to study the entropy of 𝑀 𝜋 𝜙 (𝜇 0, 1).Consider first the case when 𝜙 is satisfiable. In this case, fix a satisfying assignment 𝐴 and consider a strategy 𝜋 𝐴 which for each 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 chooses for var (𝑣 ) the action 𝑣 if 𝐴 (𝑣 ) = 1 and the action ¬𝑣 if 

𝐴 (𝑣 ) = 0. Similarly, for each 𝑐 ∈ 𝐶 , it picks a literal of 𝑐 satisfied by 𝐴 and picks the corresponding action. Note that 𝜋 𝐴 is a memoryless strategy. By construction, 𝑀 𝜋 𝐴  

> 𝜙

(𝜇 0, 1) is supported on a subset of 

𝐿 of size exactly 𝑛 , and each element of the support has probability at least 𝛼 𝑛 . Thus, if 𝜙 is satisfiable, then there exists a strategy 𝜋 (namely 𝜋 𝐴 ) such that 𝑀 𝜋 𝜙 (𝜇 0, 1) (and, therefore, 𝑀 𝜋 𝜙 (𝜇 0, 𝑡 ) for all 𝑡 ≥ 1,as noted above) has entropy at most log (𝑛 /𝛼 ).Next, consider the case when at most 9𝑚 /10 of the clauses in 𝜙 are satisfiable. Our goal is to show that in this case, for every strategy 𝜋 , the entropy of 𝑀 𝜋 𝜙 (𝜇 0, 1) is at least 𝜏 +log (𝑛 /𝛼 ), for some positive constant 𝜏 . We first observe that it is enough to prove this lower bound for deterministic strategies. To see this, note that when 𝜋 is randomized, 𝑀 𝜋 𝜙 (𝜇 0, 1) is a convex combination of various 𝑀 𝜋 ′ 

> 𝜙

(𝜇 0, 1)

where 𝜋 ′ varies over a set of deterministic strategies, so that, by the concavity of the entropy, the en-tropy of 𝑀 𝜋 𝜙 (𝜇 0, 1) is at least as much as the entropy of 𝑀 𝜋 ′ 

> 𝜙

(𝜇 0, 1) for some deterministic strategy 𝜋 ′.Thus, in order to show that for every strategy 𝜋 , the entropy of 𝑀 𝜋 𝜙 (𝜇 0, 1) is at least 𝜏 + log (𝑛 /𝛼 ), for some positive constant 𝜏 , it is enough to show that for every deterministic strategy 𝜋 , the entropy of 

𝑀 𝜋 𝜙 (𝜇 0, 1) is at least 𝜏 + log (𝑛 /𝛼 ).Consider now an arbitrary deterministic strategy 𝜋 and denote by 𝐿 𝜋 the set of literals in 𝐿 selected by 𝜋 for the states in ˜𝑉 . Since at most 9/10 fraction of the clauses in 𝜙 can be satisfied by any assignment, it follows that for at least 𝑚 /10 clauses in 𝐶 , 𝜋 must select a literal that is not in 𝐿 𝜋 . Further, since each variable appears at most 𝐵 times in 𝜙 , at least 𝑚 /( 10 𝐵 ) literals in 𝐿 \ 𝐿 𝜋 must be selected by these (at least) 𝑚 /10 unsatisfied clauses. Let Γ denote the set of these chosen literals in 𝐿 \ 𝐿 𝜋 , so that 

|Γ| ≥ 𝑚 /( 10 𝐵 ). Let 𝜇 1 denote the probability distribution 𝑀 𝜋 𝜙 (𝜇 0, 1) induced by 𝜋 at time 1. Then, the probability weight assigned by 𝜇 1 to each literal in Γ lies in the interval [𝛽 /𝑚, 𝐵𝛽 /𝑚 ]. On the other hand, the probability weight assigned by 𝜇 1 to each literal in 𝐿 𝜋 is at least 𝛼 /𝑛 . Since 𝑚 ≥ 𝑛 /3, our choice of 𝛼 and 𝛽 implies that 𝛼 /𝑛 ≥ 𝐵𝛽 /𝑚 . Using these facts, we now show that 𝐻 (𝜇 1) ≥ log (𝑛 /𝛼 )+ 3𝛽 .Towards this, consider the probability distribution ˜𝜇 , supported only on 𝐿 𝜋 , obtained from 𝜇 1 by transferring the probability weight of each literal ℓ ∈ Γ to the unique literal in 𝐿 𝜋 corresponding to the negation of ℓ. Then, for each ℓ ∈ 𝐿 𝜋 , ˜𝜇 (ℓ) ∈ [ 𝛼 /𝑛, 𝛼 /𝑛 + 𝐵𝛽 /𝑚 ]. It follows that 

𝐻 ( ˜𝜇 ) ≥ log (𝑛 /𝛼 ) − log (1 + ( 𝐵𝛽 /𝑚 )/( 𝛼 /𝑛 )) , (4) which is at least log (𝑛 /𝛼 ) − 3𝐵𝛽 /𝛼 (since 𝑚 ≥ 𝑛 /3). Further, by the construction of ˜𝜇 , 𝜇 1 can be obtained from ˜𝜇 by transferring, sequentially for each literal ℓ in Γ, probability mass 𝜇 1 (ℓ) from the literal ¬ℓ ∈ 𝐿 𝜋 to the literal ℓ. Applying the entropy increment estimate of Observation 7 to each such transfer, we see that each such transfer increases the entropy by at least 𝜇 1 (ℓ) log ( ˜𝜇 (¬ ℓ)/ 𝜇 1 (ℓ)) , which is at least 𝛽 𝑚 · log 

 𝛼𝑚 𝑛𝐵𝛽 



since as argued above, 𝜇 1 (ℓ) ∈ [ 𝛽 /𝑚, 𝐵𝛽 /𝑚 ] and ˜𝜇 (¬ ℓ) ≥ 𝛼 /𝑛 . Since there are 8|Γ| ≥ 𝑚 /( 10 𝐵 ) transfer steps and we have 𝑚 ≥ 𝑛 /3, we therefore get 

𝐻 (𝜇 1) ≥ 𝐻 ( ˜𝜇 ) + 𝛽 

10 𝐵 log 

 𝛼 

3𝐵𝛽 



(5) 

≥ log (𝑛 /𝛼 ) + 𝛽 

10 𝐵 · log 𝜒 − 60 𝐵 2 (6) 

≥ log (𝑛 /𝛼 ) + 3𝛽. (7) (Here, 𝜒 ··= 𝛼  

> 3𝐵𝛽

≥ exp (90 𝐵 2) with our choice of 𝛼 and 𝛽 , and we also use 𝛼 ≥ 1/2 to get the second inequality.) We thus see that when at most 9/10 fraction of the clauses in 𝜙 are satisfiable, 𝑀 𝜋 𝜙 (𝜇 0, 1) has entropy at least log (𝑛 /𝛼 ) + 3𝛽 (where 𝛽 as chosen above is an absolute constant). On the other hand, as shown above, when 𝜙 is satisfiable, there is a strategy 𝜋 which ensures that the entropy of 𝑀 𝜋 𝜙 (𝜇 0, 𝑡 ), for every 

𝑡 ≥ 1, is at most log (𝑛 /𝛼 ). Using standard methods for computing approximations to the logarithm, we can compute a rational threshold 𝛾 ∈ [ log (𝑛 /𝛼 ), log (𝑛 /𝛼 ) + 𝛽 ] in time 𝑂 (log 𝑛 ) (note that both 𝛼 and 𝛽 

are absolute constants). Further, given 𝜙 , 𝑀 𝜙 can be constructed in time polynomial in 𝑚 and 𝑛 . 𝑀 𝜙 𝜇 0

and 𝛾 thus give us a polynomial-time constructible instance of 𝜏 -Apx-Low-Entropy-Decision (with 

𝜏 = 𝛽 and 𝐾 = 1) that has answer NO when at most 9/10 -fraction of the clauses in 𝜙 are satisfiable, and YES when 𝜙 is satisfiable. Combined with Trevisan’s hardness result mentioned above, the above reduction establishes that a polynomial time algorithm for 𝜏 -Apx-Low-Entropy-Decision (with 𝜏 = 𝛽 

and 𝐾 = 1) implies that NP = RP. □

Remark 8. Consider the memoryless version of Apx-Low-Entropy-Decision , where we constrain the strategy 𝜋 to be memoryless. Since the strategy 𝜋 𝐴 constructed in the above proof in the YES case is memoryless, it follows that even the memoryless version of Apx-Low-Entropy-Decision is NP-hard (under randomized reductions). Further, the proof above can be easily modified to prove hardness for any 𝐾 > 1 as well. 

# 5 An invariant synthesis based algorithm 

As described in the previous section, even the decision version of our synthesis problem, even for 

memoryless strategies, is hard. A fruitful paradigm for attacking such hard problems has been through the construction of sound but possibly incomplete methods via invariant and template-based synthesis. This approach has been used in different settings including program correctness [CSS03, CFGG20], probabilistic termination [CNv17, BCJ +23], control theory [PJP07, ST11]. For distributional objectives in MDPs this broad technique has been adapted in [ACMŽ23, ACMZ24] for the special case of affine objectives. Our goal in this section is to lift this approach to entropy objectives that are non-linear and even non-polynomial. Instead of attempting a general description of the idea of invariants, we describe the instantiation of the idea in the context of strategy synthesis for enforcing distributional objectives in MDPs [ACMŽ23]. Let 𝑥 (𝑡 ) denote the probability distribution of the MDP at time 𝑡 . Let us suppose that our objective is to enforce that for at all times 𝑡 ≥ 𝐾 (where 𝐾 is the warm-up parameter), a predicate C( 𝑥 (𝑡 ) ) holds. For our problem, the predicate C = C𝛾 is parameterized by a threshold 𝛾 > 0, and takes the following form: 

C( 𝑥 ) = C𝛾 (𝑥 ) · ·= 𝐻 (𝑥 ) ≤ 𝛾, (8) where 𝐻 is the entropy function. Given an initial distribution 𝜇 0 of the MDP, the idea is to search together for a memoryless policy 

𝜋 and another predicate 𝐼 (called an invariant ), which have the following properties: 1. (Initialization) 𝐼 (𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝐾 )) holds; 92. (Induction) ∀𝑥, 𝐼 (𝑥 ) =⇒ 𝐼 (𝑀 𝜋 (𝑥, 1)) ; and 3. (Invariant implies safety) ∀𝑥, 𝐼 (𝑥 ) =⇒ C( 𝑥 ).Note that if we find a memoryless strategy 𝜋 and an invariant 𝐼 satisfying the above properties, then it follows immediately (by induction) that C( 𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝑡 )) is satisfied for all times 𝑡 ≥ 𝐾 .

## 5.1 Affine Invariants 

The problem then reduces to automating the search for such invariants. Once again, to make an auto-mated search feasible, the popular paradigm is to choose one of the simplest possible kinds of invari-ants: an affine invariant. In this one searches over those 𝐼 that can be represented as a conjunction of affine inequalities. In other words, we fix a number 𝑚 of inequalities (we call this number the template size of the invariant 𝐼 ), and if 𝑛 is the number of states of the MDP, then in terms of an 𝑚 ×𝑛 real matrix 

𝐴 and a real vector 𝑏 ∈ R𝑚 , we define 

𝐼 (𝑥 ) · ·=

(

𝐴𝑥 ≤ 𝑏, 

®1⊤𝑥 = 1, and 𝑥 ≥ 0. (9) i.e., 𝐼 (𝑥 ) holds if and only if the inequalities 𝐴𝑥 ≤ 𝑏 hold coordinate-wise and 𝑥 is a probability distri-bution. It is clear that for such invariants, the initialization constraint (item 1) is simply the feasibility question for a system of polynomial inequalities (which are linear in 𝐴 and 𝑏 , but possibly non-linear, when 𝐾 > 1, in the variables representing 𝜋 ). We now write the defining constraints in the inductive condition (item 2) for such an affine invariant in the above notation. This leads to a conjunction of constraints of the form 

Φ = Φ(𝑄, 𝑝, 𝑐, 𝑑 ) · ·= ∀𝑥 (𝑄𝑥 ≤ 𝑝 =⇒ 𝑐 ⊤𝑥 ≤ 𝑑 ), (10) where 𝑄, 𝑝, 𝑐 and 𝑑 depend upon 𝐴, 𝑏 and the variables representing the strategy 𝜋 , and the antecedent 

𝑄𝑥 ≤ 𝑝 always denotes the invariant constraint 𝐼 (𝑥 ) from eq. (9) (the equality constraint in eq. (9) is handled by the usual trick of replacing an equality by a pair of inequalities). Such universally quantified implication constraints cannot be easily handled by standard solvers. Thus, several invariant synthesis approaches, including those of [CS01, CGMZ22, CGG +25] and [ACMŽ23] convert the above quantified linear constraints into a simple existential constraint via an application of linear programming duality in the form of Farkas’ lemma , as stated below. 

Theorem 9 (Farkas’ lemma ). Let 𝑄 ∈ Rℓ ×𝑛 , 𝑐 ∈ R𝑛 , 𝑑 ∈ R and 𝑝 ∈ Rℓ be fixed. Suppose that the system 𝑄𝑥 ≤ 𝑝 is feasible (i.e., some 𝑥 ∈ R𝑛 satisfies it). Then the constraint Φ(𝑄, 𝑝, 𝑐, 𝑑 ) in eq. (10) is equivalent to the constraint 

Ψ = Ψ(𝑄, 𝑐, 𝑝, 𝑑 ) · ·= ∃𝑦 (𝑦 ≥ 0 ∧ 𝑄 ⊤𝑦 = 𝑐 ∧ 𝑝 ⊤𝑦 ≤ 𝑑 ).

Note that the initialization condition in item 1 implies that the equivalence in Theorem 9 applies to each instance of eq. (10) arising from item 2: this is because for these instances, the requirement 𝑄𝑥 ≤ 𝑝 

is the same as 𝐼 (𝑥 ), which, by the initialization condition, has the feasible solution 𝑥 = 𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝐾 ). We can therefore apply this equivalence to transform all the constraints of the form described in eq. (10) arising from item 2 into a single feasibility question about a system of polynomial inequalities over the variables 𝐴, 𝑏, 𝜋 and the freshly introduced auxiliary variables 𝑦 (a separate set of these auxiliary variables is introduced for each of the translated constraints). Note further that this system is actually a system of non-strict linear inequalities in the auxiliary variables when 𝐴, 𝑏, and 𝜋 are fixed. It remains to handle the important “invariant =⇒ safety” constraint given in item 3. In [ACMŽ23], the safety predicate C was itself given as a conjunction of finitely many linear inequalities. Thus, in their setting, the constraints arising from item 3 are also of the form given in eq. (10), and the above process was sufficient. 10 5.2 Entropy-based Safety Constraints 

Our point of departure from this earlier setting is that since our safety predicate C is no more described in terms of a finite set of linear inequalities (see eq. (8)), we cannot use the form of Farkas’ lemma given in Theorem 9 (or the even more powerful Handelman’s Theorem [Han88] used for polynomial constraints) to carry out the above translation. We get around this by exploiting the fact that our entropy objective is convex, and take recourse to general convex duality. In particular, we use the following result from the well-known duality theory of maximum-entropy programs. 

Proposition 10 (see, e.g., [BV04, p. 228] ). Let 𝑄 ∈ Rℓ ×𝑛 and 𝑝 ∈ Rℓ be fixed. Let D · ·= {𝑥 |𝑥 ≥ 0} ⊆ R𝑛 

be the domain of the concave function 𝐻 (𝑥 ) · ·= − 𝑛 Í

> 𝑖 =1

𝑥 𝑖 log 𝑥 𝑖 . Suppose that there is an 𝑥 0 ∈ D satisfying 

𝑄𝑥 0 ≤ 𝑝 and ®1⊤𝑥 = 1. Then the optimization program 

sup  

> 𝑥 ∈ D

𝐻 (𝑥 ) subject to 𝑄𝑥 ≤ 𝑝 and ®1⊤𝑥 = 1 (11) 

has the same optimal value as the program 

inf  

> 𝜆 ≥0

𝑔 (𝜆 ) · ·= 𝑝 ⊤𝜆 + log 

> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

exp (− 𝜆 ⊤𝑄 𝑖 )

!

. (12) 

Here 𝑄 𝑖 denotes 𝑖 th column of 𝑄 . Further, 𝑔 is a convex function of 𝜆 .

Remark 11. The above result is usually stated under the additional hypothesis that the feasible point 

𝑥 0 has all its entries strictly positive (this is the version given, e.g., by [BV04]), in which form it is proved using Slater’s constraint qualification. However, this additional hypothesis is not required for maximum-entropy programs with linear constraints, like the one in eq. (11) above. In this case, it is sufficient that the primal program has at least one feasible solution, and this can be shown for instance using the general duality results of [Roc70, Theorem 30.4]. We believe this result to be folklore, but for the sake of completeness, and due to its independent interest, we provide a proof of the above proposition in Appendix A. 

## 5.3 A Sound and (Conditionally) Relatively Complete Procedure 

We now have all the technical ingredients needed to develop our algorithmic procedure. We combine the above strong duality result with ideas from invariant synthesis to obtain a sound and (conditionally) relatively complete synthesis algorithm for Low-Entropy (in the following, we use the notation in-troduced in its definition in Problem 1) that we call AlgoEnt . We frame the problem as that of finding the smallest possible threshold 𝛾 for which we can find a strategy 𝜋 that ensures that the predicate 

C𝛾 (𝑥 ) · ·= 𝐻 (𝑥 ) ≤ 𝛾 (13) holds for 𝑥 = 𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝑡 ) for all 𝑡 ≥ 𝐾 . Let 𝑛 be the number of states in the MDP 𝑀 .

Step 1. We start by choosing a positive integer parameter 𝑚 , the template size of the affine invariant 𝐼 ,and consider the affine invariant 𝐼 (𝑥 ) described above in eq. (9). We create the following set of template variables : an 𝑚 × 𝑛 matrix 𝐴 along with an 𝑚 dimensional vector 𝑏 of real valued variables (in order to encode the invariant 𝐼 (𝑥 )), and real-valued variables 𝜋 (𝑠, 𝑎 ) for each state action pair (𝑠, 𝑎 ) in the MDP. We collectively denote these latter variables, with a slight abuse of notation, by 𝜋 , and they encode the memoryless strategy 𝜋 that we are looking for. 

Step 2. We define Γ(𝐴, 𝑏, 𝜋 ) to be the set of all the constraints on 𝐼 and 𝜋 given by the initialization and induction constraints (items 1 and 2) above, along with the following set of consistency constraints for 

𝜋 : for all states 𝑠 of 𝑀 , 𝜋 (𝑠, 𝑎 ) ≥ 0 for all actions 𝑎 ∈ Act (𝑠 ), and Í𝑎 ∈Act (𝑠 ) 𝜋 (𝑠, 𝑎 ) = 1.

11 Step 3. The constraints arising in Γ (𝐴, 𝑏, 𝜋 ) from the inductive constraint (item 2) involve a univer-sal quantification (eq. (10)), which by the use of Farkas’ lemma, can be converted into an equivalent feasibility question about a system of inequalities (with additional variables). We carry out this trans-formation for each universally quantified constraint of the form given by eq. (10), and henceforth de-scribe the equivalent form of Γ (𝐴, 𝑏, 𝜋 ) so obtained also by the same notation. After this sequence of transformations, Γ (𝐴, 𝑏, 𝜋 ) is a conjunction of polynomial inequalities in the variables 𝐴 , 𝑏 , 𝜋 (which appear as free variables) and a collection of auxiliary variables (from the translation described above), so that all auxiliary variables are existentially quantified. 

Step 4. With this setup, the problem of finding the minimum threshold 𝛾 for which C𝛾 can be forced can be encoded as 

inf    

> 𝐴,𝑏,𝜋 :Γ(𝐴,𝑏,𝜋 )holds

( sup    

> 𝑥 :𝑥 ≥0

𝐻 (𝑥 )

subj. to 𝐴𝑥 ≤ 𝑏, ®1⊤𝑥 = 1

)

. (14) Again, the min-max and non-linear nature of this problem is not easily handled by standard solvers, so we attempt to convert the problem into a single optimization problem, via the use of duality for max-imum entropy (Proposition 10). We note that when 𝐴, 𝑏, 𝜋 satisfy Γ (𝐴, 𝑏, 𝜋 ), the feasibility constraint required in Proposition 10 holds (due to item 1). Thus, the problem above is equivalent to 

inf     

> 𝐴,𝑏,𝜋 :Γ(𝐴,𝑏,𝜋 )holds

inf  

> 𝜆 ≥0

𝑔 (𝜆 ), (15) where 𝑔 (𝜆 ) · ·= 𝑏 ⊤𝜆 +log  Í 𝑛 𝑖 =1 exp (− 𝜆 ⊤𝐴 𝑖 ) , with 𝐴 𝑖 denoting the 𝑖 th column of 𝐴 , is a convex function of 𝜆 . Thus, AlgoENT resulting from the above four steps satisfies: 

Theorem 12. Given MDP 𝑀 , initial distribution 𝜇 0, and warm-up parameter 𝐾 ,

• (soundness) if AlgoENT returns 𝜋 , invariant 𝐼 , threshold 𝛾 , then ∀𝑡 ≥ 𝐾 , C𝛾 (𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝑡 )) holds. 

• (conditional relative completeness) for a rational threshold 𝛾 , and a positive integer 𝑚 , if there exists a memoryless strategy 𝜋 and an affine invariant 𝐼 of template size 𝑚 which satisfies the three con-ditions (items 1 to 3) with respect to C𝛾 ′ for some 𝛾 ′ < 𝛾 then AlgoENT will detect this, assuming decidability of the theory of reals with exponentiation. Proof. Soundness. Suppose that we obtain values for 𝐴, 𝑏, 𝜋 and 𝜆 which satisfy the constraints in the program in eq. (15) and for which 𝑔 (𝜆 ) ≤ 𝛾 . Then, it follows from the equivalence of eq. (15) and eq. (14) that the invariant 𝐼 described by 𝐴 and 𝑏 , in addition to satisfying the initialization and inductive constraints (items 1 and 2), also implies the following version of the safety constraint (item 3): 

∀𝑥, (𝐼 (𝑥 ) =⇒ 𝐻 (𝑥 ) ≤ 𝛾 ). By the discussion at the beginning of this section, this therefore implies that 𝜋 satisfies the requirement that 𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝑡 ) has entropy at most 𝛾 at all times 𝑡 ≥ 𝐾 .

(Conditional) Relative Completeness. Suppose that we are given a rational threshold 𝛾 , and also that for some positive integer 𝑚 , there exists an affine invariant 𝐼 of template size 𝑚 which satisfies the three conditions (items 1 to 3) with respect to C𝛾 ′ for some 𝛾 ′ < 𝛾 . In order to prove relative completeness, we need to give a procedure that detects that such an invariant exists. We now show that assuming a conjecture from transcendental number theory, such a procedure exists. We notice that the formulation in eq. (15) implies that such an invariant exists if and only if the optimization problem defined in eq. (15) with template size 𝑚 has optimal value less than 𝛾 . Given the form of the optimization problem, this occurs if and only if there exist 𝐴, 𝑏, 𝜋 and 𝜆 satisfying 

𝜆 ≥ 0; Γ(𝐴, 𝑏, 𝜋 ) holds , and 

> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

exp  −𝜆 ⊤𝐴 𝑖 

 < exp (𝛾 − 𝑏 𝑇 𝜆 ). (16) 12 Recall that Γ(𝐴, 𝑏, 𝜋 ) is a system of polynomial inequalities. The sentence in eq. (16) is, therefore, a sentence in the first order language of real closed fields augmented with the exponential function. Un-fortunately, in contrast to the case of the existential theory of reals, which is known to be decidable in PSPACE [Can88], we are not aware of any unconditional decidability results for this augmented the-ory. However, it was shown by [MW96] that assuming a famous conjecture in transcendental number theory known as the real version of Schanuel’s conjecture, the first order theory of reals augmented with the exponential function is decidable (see [Wil97] for an exposition of this result and the under-lying conjecture). Since the existential theory of reals with the exponential function is a fragment of this theory, we obtain that the sentence in eq. (16) is also decidable assuming the same conjecture. □

We describe two more salient features of AlgoEnt . The first is regarding the complexity of veri-fying whether the answers reported by the algorithm are indeed correct. 

Verification. Suppose we are given some arbitrary values of 𝐴, 𝑏 and 𝜋 , and it is claimed that these describe an invariant 𝐼 and a strategy 𝜋 for which the initialization, inductive and safety constraints (items 1 to 3) are all satisfied, for a certain threshold 𝛾 . We can show that this claim can be verified in polynomial time. In other words, verifying the answer given out by AlgoEnt is easy, up to an additive approximation factor. Formally, 

Proposition 13 (Approximately verifying a candidate invariant ). Given the MDP 𝑀 , initial dis-tribution 𝜇 0, warm-up parameter 𝐾 , a candidate description (𝐴, 𝑏 ) of the invariant 𝐼 (using eq. (9) ), a strategy 𝜋 , a threshold 𝛾 and additive approximation parameter 𝜖 , all specified in terms of rational num-bers represented as ratios of binary integers, we can check in time polynomial in 𝐾 and the representation lengths of the input whether the following conditions hold: 1. (Initialization) 𝐼 (𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝐾 )) holds; 2. (Induction) ∀𝑥, 𝐼 (𝑥 ) =⇒ 𝐼 (𝑀 𝜋 (𝑥, 1)) ; and 3. (Invariant implies safety) ∀𝑥, 𝐼 (𝑥 ) =⇒ (𝐻 (𝑥 ) ≤ 𝛾 + 𝜖 ).Proof. We first recall that for fixed 𝐴, 𝑏 and 𝜋 , Γ(𝐴, 𝑏, 𝜋 ) is a feasibility question for a system of (non-strict) linear equalities in the auxiliary variables. Thus, whether Γ (𝐴, 𝑏, 𝜋 ) is satisfied can be checked by a linear program solver in time polynomial in 𝐾 and the representation length of the input: the polynomial dependence on 𝐾 arises because the representation length of the distribution 𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝐾 )

can be at most polynomial in 𝐾 . It remains to check whether the inner maximization problem in eq. (14) has optimal value 𝛾 . To do this, we note that this problem involves the maximization of the concave 

entropy function over the (compact) probability simplex, with a further set of linear constraints. Under these conditions, a ±𝜖 additive approximation to the optimal value of this problem can be obtained in time that is polynomial in log (1/𝜖 ), via a standard result of [GLS93, Theorem 4.3.13], based on the shallow cut ellipsoid method of [YN76] (see also Section 13.3 of [Vis21] for an explicit statement). Thus, this procedure lets us certify whether the claim holds with the slightly relaxed threshold 𝛾 + 𝜖 

(in time that grows polynomially in log (1/𝜖 )). □

Numerical Viability. Finally, we address the implementability of the above procedure. The fact that for fixed 𝐴, 𝑏 and 𝜋 , the underlying optimization problem is convex suggests the use of non-linear solvers (such as Gurobi [Gur]) that are optimized for convex problems. These solvers typically require that the problem should be in the following form: optimize a function subject to a system of inequalities. The crucial point is that while the min-max formulation in eq. (14) is not of such a form, the final formulation that we obtain in eq. (15) is. This allows us to use state-of-the-art solvers on our final formulation. In Section 7, we report experimental results testing out the approach of feeding the problem in eq. (15) to such a solver. 13 5.4 A sufficient condition for affine invariants 

We now demonstrate a natural situation in which affine invariants indeed suffice to certify a low-entropy condition (despite the non-linearity of the latter). Recall that a Markov chain is said to be 

ergodic if it is irreducible and aperiodic, and in that case it has a unique stationary distribution to which it converges (see, e.g., [LP17, Theorem 4.9]). We show that if the MDP 𝑀 admits a memoryless policy 𝜋 for which 1. the induced Markov chain 𝑀 𝜋 is ergodic, and 2. the entropy 𝐻 (𝜇 ∗) of the unique stationary distribution 𝜇 ∗ of 𝑀 𝜋 is below the goal threshold, i.e., 𝐻 (𝜇 ∗) < 𝛾 ,then there exists a warm-up parameter 𝐾 and an affine invariant 𝐼 of size polynomial in the number of states of 𝑀 that certifies the low-entropy condition for 𝜋 , i.e., that 𝐻 (𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝑡 )) < 𝛾 for all 𝑡 ≥ 𝐾 . The intuition is that under the above conditions, the MDP must converge to the stationary distribution, so that after a certain number of steps (depending on the mixing time of the induced Markov chain), we will get within a small ball around the stationary distribution. Thus, using the continuity of the entropy, we can find a convex linear invariant around this stationary distribution that witnesses the safety condition. One subtlety in this analysis is that the linear invariant capturing such a ball does not a priori need to be of small size. For example, the natural way to define such a ball is in terms of the total-variation (or, equivalently, ℓ1) norm, in which case the resulting invariant would be of size exponential in the number of states in the MDP. However, by looking at a ball defined according to a carefully chosen weighted version of the ℓ∞-norm we can ensure that the invariant is of size at most polynomial in the size of the MDP. We formalize this argument below. 

Proposition 14. Let 𝑀 be an MDP on a finite state space 𝑆 and let 𝜋 be a memoryless policy such that the induced Markov chain 𝑀 𝜋 is ergodic. Let 𝜇 ∗ ∈ Δ(𝑆 ) be the unique stationary distribution of 𝑀 𝜋 .Further, assume that the safe set is of the form 𝐻 (𝑥 ) ≤ 𝛾 , for a 𝛾 satisfying 𝐻 (𝜇 ∗) < 𝛾 . Then for any starting distribution 𝜇 0, there exists a warm-up parameter 𝐾 ∈ N and an affine invariant 𝐼 defined by 

𝑂 (| 𝑆 |) linear inequalities such that: 1. Initialization: 𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝐾 ) ∈ 𝐼 .2. Induction: ∀𝑥 𝐼 (𝑥 ) =⇒ 𝐼 (𝑀 𝜋 (𝑥, 1)) .3. Safety: ∀𝑥 𝐼 (𝑥 ) =⇒ 𝐻 (𝑥 ) ≤ 𝛾 .Thus, there exists an affine invariant of the form sought for by our algorithm. Proof. We first construct a neighborhood around the stationary distribution where the entropy is guar-anteed to be at most 𝛾 . To do so, we start by observing that the entropy function 𝐻 is continuous on the simplex Δ(𝑆 ). Since 𝐻 (𝜇 ∗) < 𝛾 , let 𝜀 := 𝛾 −𝐻 (𝜇 ∗) > 0. Now, we define 𝐵 𝛿 := {𝑥 ∈ Δ(𝑆 ) | ∥ 𝑥 −𝜇 ∗ ∥∞ ≤ 𝛿 },

for a particular 𝛿 > 0 that we will soon determine. We note also that since 𝑀 𝜋 is ergodic, all entries of 

𝜇 ∗ are strictly positive. One constraint on our eventual choice of 𝛿 is that 𝛿 has to be smaller than the smallest entry of 𝜇 ∗: this constraint on 𝛿 ensures that all 𝑥 ∈ 𝐵 𝛿 have positive entries. Let 𝑛 = |𝑆 | be the number of states, and for ease of notation, we index the states as {1, 2, . . . , 𝑛 }. We define 𝑓 : R≥0 → R by 𝑓 (𝑥 ) = −𝑥 log 𝑥 (with 𝑓 (0) · ·= 0), so that 𝐻 (𝑥 ) − 𝐻 (𝜇 ∗) = Í𝑛 𝑖 =1 (𝑓 (𝑥 𝑖 ) − 𝑓 (𝜇 ∗ 

> 𝑖

)) .Further, 𝑓 is a concave function, so that we have 𝑓 (𝑏 ) − 𝑓 (𝑎 ) ≤ 𝑓 ′ (𝑎 )( 𝑏 − 𝑎 ) for all 𝑎, 𝑏 > 0. We thus have, for each coordinate 𝑖 ,

𝑓 (𝑥 𝑖 ) − 𝑓 (𝜇 ∗ 

> 𝑖

) ≤ −( 1 + log 𝜇 ∗ 

> 𝑖

) · ( 𝑥 𝑖 − 𝜇 ∗ 

> 𝑖

). (17) 14 Now, when 𝑥 ∈ 𝐵 𝛿 , we have |𝑥 𝑖 − 𝜇 ∗ 

> 𝑖

| ≤ 𝛿 for all 𝑖 . Using this in eq. (17), we thus get 

𝐻 (𝑥 ) − 𝐻 (𝜇 ∗) ≤ 𝛿 

> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

|log 𝜇 ∗ 

> 𝑖

+ 1|. (18) Thus, by choosing 𝛿 < min 

n 𝜖 Í𝑛 𝑖 =1 | log 𝜇 ∗  

> 𝑖 +1|

, min 𝑖 𝜇 ∗

> 𝑖

o

, we get that all 𝑥 ∈ 𝐵 𝛿 have positive entries, and also that 

sup  

> 𝑥 ∈𝐵 𝛿

𝐻 (𝑥 ) ≤ 𝐻 (𝜇 ∗) + 𝜖 ≤ 𝛾 (19) We now have to show that there exists an affine invariant 𝐼 of small size such that 𝐼 (𝑥 ) implies that 

𝑥 ∈ 𝐵 𝛿 . We claim that the following affine invariant 𝐼 (𝑥 ) works: 

𝐼 (𝑥 ) · ·=



𝑥 𝑖 ≥ 0 for all 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑛, and 

> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

𝑥 𝑖 = 1, and 

−𝛿 · 𝜇 ∗ 

> 𝑖

≤ 𝑥 𝑖 − 𝜇 ∗ 

> 𝑖

≤ 𝛿 · 𝜇 ∗ 

> 𝑖

for all 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑛. 

(20) More succinctly, the last condition in the affine invariant in eq. (20) can be written in the form of a modified ℓ∞ norm inequality as 

∥( 𝑥 − 𝜇 ∗)diag (𝜇 ∗)−1 ∥∞ ≤ 𝛿, (21) where diag (𝜇 ∗) denotes the 𝑛 × 𝑛 diagonal matrix with the entries of 𝜇 ∗, in order, on the diagonal. Further, if 𝐼 (𝑥 ) is satisfied, then we also have 𝑥 ∈ 𝐵 𝛿 , since the 𝜇 ∗ 

> 𝑖

are all at most 1.Note that the affine invariant 𝐼 defined in eq. (20) has size at most 𝑂 (𝑛 ). We now verify that 𝐼 

satisfies the three required conditions. 

Safety: As noted above, if 𝐼 (𝑥 ) is satisfied, then 𝑥 ∈ 𝐵 𝛿 . Thus, eq. (19) shows that 𝐼 (𝑥 ) implies the safety condition 𝐻 (𝑥 ) ≤ 𝛾 . Induction: Suppose that 𝐼 (𝑥 ) is satisfied. For ease of notation let 𝑀 

denote the transition matrix of the Markov chain 𝑀 𝜋 , and let 𝑦 ··= 𝑀 𝜋 (𝑥, 1) = 𝑥𝑀 . Note that since 

𝑥 is a probability vector and 𝑀 is the transition matrix of a Markov chain, the first two conditions in the definition of 𝐼 (𝑦 ) (eq. (20)) are automatically satisfied. We now check the third condition. Define 

𝑣 ··= 𝑦 − 𝜇 ∗ = (𝑥 − 𝜇 ∗)𝑀 . We then have, for each 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑛 ,

|𝑦 𝑖 − 𝜇 ∗ 

> 𝑖

| = |𝑣 𝑖 | =

> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

(𝑥 𝑗 − 𝜇 ∗ 

> 𝑗

) · 𝑀 𝑗𝑖 ≤

> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

|𝑥 𝑗 − 𝜇 ∗ 

> 𝑗

| · 𝑀 𝑗𝑖 (22) 

≤ 𝛿 

> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝜇 ∗ 

> 𝑗

· 𝑀 𝑗𝑖 = 𝛿 · 𝜇 ∗ 

> 𝑖

, (23) where the inequality in eq. (23) holds because of the last condition in the specification of 𝐼 (𝑥 ) (eq. (20)). This verifies that if 𝐼 (𝑥 ) holds, then so does 𝐼 (𝑀 𝜋 (𝑥, 1)) .

Initialization: To establish this, we need to show that there exists a 𝐾 so that 𝐼 (𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝐾 )) holds. Choose 𝐾 to be the first time at which ∥𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝐾 ) − 𝜇 ∗ ∥1 ≤ 𝛿 · min 𝑖 𝜇 ∗ 

> 𝑖

. Since 𝑀 𝜋 is assumed to be ergodic, such a 𝐾 exists. Further, for this 𝐾 , 𝐼 (𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝐾 )) holds since 𝑣 ··= 𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝐾 ) − 𝜇 ∗ satisfies that for each 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑛 ,

|𝑣 𝑖 | ≤ ∥ 𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝐾 ) − 𝜇 ∗ ∥1 ≤ 𝛿𝜇 ∗ 

> 𝑖

. □

We remark that if a a lower bound on the rate of convergence of 𝑀 𝜋 is known, we can use this in-formation to compute an upper bound on the warm-up parameter 𝐾 required in the above proposition, thus removing the dependence on 𝐾 in the proposition above. 15 6 Entropy, Memory and Randomization 

In this paper we have focused on synthesizing memoryless strategies. An immediate question from a theoretical point of view is whether such strategies always suffice. For reachability and safety objectives that are state-based , it is well-known that deterministic and memoryless strategies suf-fice [Put94, Section 4.4]. In contrast, we show next that for our entropy objectives, memoryless strategies do not suffice, and even strategies that merely keep track of the current time step can do better. As mentioned in the introduction, this also differentiates our work from path-based en-tropy [SOC +20, BLNW14, CH14]. 

Proposition 15. There exists an instance of Low-Entropy-Decision for which there are no memoryless strategies that answer YES, but there exists a memoryful strategy (which depends only on the parity of the current time) that answers YES. Proof. Consider the following MDP 𝑀 3 in Figure 3, with 𝐾 = 1, and 𝜇 0 being the distribution that gives probability mass 1 in the top state and 0 elsewhere. Consider the case in which we are only restricted to (randomized) memoryless strategies. To parametrize those strategies, let the probability of choosing 

𝑎 be 𝑥 .

𝑎, 0.7

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

𝑏, 0.05 

𝑏, 0.05 

𝑏, 0.9 𝑎, 0.3

Figure 3: MDP 𝑀 3

We then plot the entropy at times 𝑡 = 1, 2, 3 as a function of 𝑥 . The corresponding entropies are given below. After 1 step: 

− ( 0.9 − 0.6𝑥 ) ln (( 0.9 − 0.6𝑥 )) − ( 0.1 (1 − 𝑥 )) ln (( 0.05 (1 − 𝑥 ))) − 0.7𝑥 ln (0.7𝑥 ) .

After 2 steps: 

− 2 (0.9 − 0.6𝑥 )2 ln (0.9 − 0.6𝑥 )−  0.1 (1 − 𝑥 ) ( 1.9 − 0.6𝑥 )  · ln (0.05 (1 − 𝑥 ) ( 1.9 − 0.6𝑥 )) − ( 0.7𝑥 ) ln (0.7𝑥 )− 0.7𝑥 (0.9 − 0.6𝑥 ) ln (0.7𝑥 (0.9 − 0.6𝑥 )) .

After 3 steps: 

− 3 (0.9 − 0.6𝑥 )3 ln (0.9 − 0.6𝑥 )− 0.7𝑥 (0.9 − 0.6𝑥 ) ln (0.7𝑥 (0.9 − 0.6𝑥 )) − 0.7𝑥  1 + ( 0.9 − 0.6𝑥 )2 ln  0.7𝑥  1 + ( 0.9 − 0.6𝑥 )2 

−  0.1 (1 − 𝑥 )  1 + 0.9 − 0.6𝑥 + ( 0.9 − 0.6𝑥 )2 · ln  0.05 (1 − 𝑥 )  1 + 0.9 − 0.6𝑥 + ( 0.9 − 0.6𝑥 )2 .

From these plots, we see that any such strategy will have a maximum entropy of at least 0.77 (to observe this, we note that for every 𝑥 , i.e., for every such strategy, at least one of the entropy functions is at least 0.77; see fig. 4). On the other hand, the non-memoryless strategy (which just keeps track just of 16 Out[  ]=               

> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 x
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0 1.2 1.4 H
> t=1
> t=2
> t=3
> H=0.77

Figure 4: Entropy functions in the proof of Prop. 15 the parity of the current time using just one bit of memory!) of alternating between choosing 𝑎 and 𝑏 

obtains a maximum entropy of at most 0.73. Thus this example illustrates that memoryless strategies are not enough to reach an optimal value. □

This leads us to the question of what memory is needed for ensuring entropy objectives. An ap-proach towards this is provided in [ACMŽ23], where it was shown that, for distributional affine safety objectives , while memoryless strategies do not suffice, distributional memoryless strategies do. Infor-mally, the only memory distributional memoryless strategies carry is of the current distribution of the MDP. Formally, distributional memoryless strategies are defined as functions from the set Δ(Ω) of probability distributions over states to the set Π1 of memoryless strategies. We extend this result to entropy objectives, by showing that distributional memoryless strategies suffice for entropy objectives as well. 

Proposition 16. For every instance of Low-Entropy-Decision , there exists a (possibly infinite memory) strategy that answers YES iff there exists a distributional memoryless strategy that answers YES. Proof. The proof essentially follows from the fact that the Low-Entropy-Decision problem is a special case of the distributional safety problem for which this characterization was shown in [ACMŽ23]. For the sake of completeness, we provide the proof here. For the reverse direction, existence of a distribu-tional memoryless policy that answers YES is evidence of a policy that answers YES. For the forward direction, let us assume a strategy (possibly with infinite memory) exists, and we observe the probabil-ity distributions we get if we follow this strategy starting from 𝜇 0. We now construct a distributional memoryless strategy using this strategy. Until such time as we see a probability distribution repeat, our distributional memoryless strategy will replicate the probability distribution over actions that the original strategy takes given that particular distribution. If we ever observe the same probability dis-tribution over states twice, the entropies of all distributions arising in between these two observations must have all been at most 𝛾 , and our distributional memoryless strategy can keep looping over this sequence of states deterministically. □

Randomization. Finally, we turn to the question of randomized vs deterministic strategies. Our results so far, and especially in Section 5, considered randomized strategies by default. But one could ask if randomization adds expressive power to memoryless strategies. Interestingly, we show that for entropy objectives, this is the case regardless of whether we consider usual (i.e., state-based) memory-less strategies or distributional memoryless strategies. 

Proposition 17. There exists an instance of Low-Entropy-Decision for which there exists no determin-istic memoryless strategy that answers YES, but for which there exists a randomized memoryless strategy that answers YES. Proof. Consider the MDP sketched in fig. 5, with 𝐾 = 1 and the initial distribution having all its prob-ability mass on node 𝐴 . All unlabeled transitions have probability 1. Any deterministic memoryless 17 𝐴 

𝑎, 1/5

𝑏, 1

1/5𝑎, 1/5 1/5𝑎, 1/5 1/5𝑎, 1/5 1/5𝑎, 1/5 1/5

Figure 5: Example exhibiting the need for randomized strategies strategy here will have to choose either action 𝑎 or 𝑏 at the first step. And after this, regardless of the choice, the entropy would be ln 5 at timestep 1 if action 𝑎 is picked or at timestep 2 if action 𝑏 is picked. On the other hand, consider a randomized memoryless strategy that chooses 𝑎 or 𝑏 with probability 

1/2 each. When following this strategy, the entropy from the first timestep onwards will be ln 5 2 + ln 2 .In general, for a strategy that chooses action 𝑎 with probability 𝑝 , the maximum entropy of the sys-tem is max {𝑝, 1 − 𝑝 } · ln 5 − 𝑝 ln 𝑝 − ( 1 − 𝑝 ) ln (1 − 𝑝 ), which is easily verified to have a minimum at 

𝑝 = 1/2. Thus, the optimal strategy in this case is a randomized strategy, which performs better than any deterministic strategy. □

In fact, one can observe that the example in the proof above also shows that even for distributional strategies, randomization may be needed. 

Corollary 18. There exists an instance of Low-Entropy-Decision for which there is no deterministic dis-tributional memoryless strategy that answers YES, but for which there exists a (randomized) distributional memoryless strategy that answers YES. 

The proof follows by observing that in the example in Figure 5, any deterministic distributional strategy will also have to choose action 𝑎 or 𝑏 resulting in the same entropy. The rest of the proof follows as before by additionally observing that any usual, i.e., “state-based” strategy is also a distri-butional strategy. In summary, this section shows that distributional memoryless strategies are necessary and suf-ficient for ensuring low entropy objectives, and are strictly more powerful than usual (state-based) memoryless strategies. Moreover randomization adds power for the entropy objective. 

# 7 Experiments 

While the focus of this work is on a theoretical exploration of entropy objectives, we also implemented a prototype to show the promise and potential of our approach. Our implementation is in Python3, builds upon the implementation framework developed in [ACMŽ23], and was run on an AMD Ryzen 7530U CPU with 16GB RAM, using Gurobi [Gur], a commercial solver with an academic license. We employ sympy [MSP +17] for the templates and pySMT [GM15] (with the mathsat backend [CGSS13]) for verification of the synthesized invariants. For the sake of efficiency, Gurobi was set to have a tolerance of 1e-9, an iteration limit of 200000, and its search space for all real number variables was bounded between -5000 and +5000 (though for some examples, we had to do away with some of this restrictions). As mentioned in the Introduction, we are not aware of any existing tools that solve the 18 entropy objective. Hence, we are unable to perform a reasonable comparison with existing work. In this section, our focus is to show that we can solve interesting examples and MDPs of a reasonable size. Given an MDP and the number of invariant constraints, we employ sympy to encode all our con-straints. A Gurobi model is then initialized with all required template variables, the constraints and objective function. Its output is fed to pySMT to verify the correctness of the synthesized invariant constraints under the generated policy (which is memoryless in our template). 

Benchmarks. We evaluate our approach on several synthetic and existing benchmarks with respect to an entropy objective. Rather than checking if we are lower than a threshold 𝛾 for evaluation, we try to compute the minimal value that can be obtained. As a result, the value computed by our approach will always be an upper bound on the real minimum. Some of the benchmarks were Markov chains where the objective was to synthesize invariants and compute the optimal low entropy. For MDPs, we also synthesize the strategy that achieves this entropy value. We present results on seven MDP benchmarks, where we could manually compute the correct en-tropy computation and check it against our prototype’s result. Of these 𝑀 1, 𝑀 2, 𝑀 3 are respectively the MDPs considered earlier in this paper in Example 3, Example 4, and Figure 3. 𝑀 4 (in Appendix B.2) is another synthetic example with five states and two actions, where we again see that randomization is needed for optimality. Beyond this, we considered the MDP Split taken from [ACMŽ23]. We also considered two gridworld environments Grid1 , which is a grid of size 2x4 with the point (0,1) being unreachable and Grid2 of size 3x4 with 3 unreachable states. In addition, we also present results on ex-amples of Markov chains, including both synthetics ones and some taken from the literature [AAGT15]. More details regarding the benchmarks as well as the initial distributions, and a few more benchmarks are in Appendix B.2. We vary the warm-up parameter 𝐾 and show results for different values of 𝐾 . For all these benchmarks, one reason to choose them was to be able to interpret the results easily, since in more complicated benchmarks, even if our tool does scale, we cannot check our answers easily. 

Results. We present a set of results in Table 1, with more details in Appendix B.2, including the in-variants and memoryless strategies synthesized. Our prototype is able to solve all these tasks with different warm-up parameters. To be able to validate the answer computed by our approach (in col-umn EntAns ), we computed the optimal answer (in column EntOpt ) in several small cases and in other cases, we ran simulations to heuristically observe a minimal answer. These answers match our approach often and we are always within a very small margin of the computed answers. The an-swers vary with varying 𝐾 since in these cases, entropy in initial steps was high and reduced as 𝐾 was increased. Our prototype is able to handle even larger benchmarks, but we are unable to validate the answers that we provide. However we do validate the invariants (which are intermediate steps) using an SMT-solver. Note that when we provide an answer, we have soundness guarantees subject to correctness of Gurobi, the back-end solver that we use. 

Discussion. Two remarks are pertinent at this point. Our templates for invariants are always con-vex and we can show that there are MDPs for which the optimal entropy cannot be achieved using templates that are affine or even convex functions. So in that sense our experiments always report an upper-bound on the minimal entropy but may not reach the minimal. This is sufficient to solve instances of Apx-Low-Entropy-Decision problems in many cases, but does not necessarily obtain the minimum, often explaining the difference between our values and the minimum entropy in Ta-ble 1. Given the hardness of the problem, we believe this to be unavoidable. At the same time, we note that the (approximate) verification problem that we showed to be solvable in polynomial time in Proposition 13 can indeed be solved efficiently using tools such as Gurobi. Second, our implementation currently depends on Gurobi [Gur], which uses multiple techniques, heuristics and optimizations, but is not known to be complete even for theory of reals. Hence at times, 19 Name #States K EntAns EntOpt Type MC 

MDP 𝑀 1 3 0 1.023 1.011 MDP 𝑀 1 3 1 0.679 0.679 MDP 𝑀 1 3 2 0.512 0.512 MDP 𝑀 2 4 0 1.324 1.091 MDP 𝑀 3 5 0 1.099 0.772 MDP 𝑀 4 5 2 0.693 0.304 

Type MC 

MC1 2 1 0.637 0.637 MC2 2 1 0.662 0.662 Insulin 5 0 1.001 0.864 Pagerank 5 0 1.537 1.443 Table 1: Comparison of Minimal Entropy Answer vs Optimal Answer across different experiments. 𝐾 

is the warm-up parameter. EntAns is the answer given by our prototype. EntOpt are optimal answers either hand-computed or derived by simulating the Markov Chain, or by grid search over all possible strategies of the MDP to identify the optimal strategy. All values rounded to three places after decimal. it cannot handle even simple examples. This limitation of the solver also causes other interesting behaviors: for instance, the solver’s performance can be highly dependent on the initial starting point, a phenomenon common to many other algorithms of this type. 

# 8 Conclusion 

In this paper, we launched an investigation into verification of distributional entropy objectives for MDPs. We considered the specific problem of synthesizing strategies to obtain low entropy in the distributions generated by an MDP. Thus in our setting, we check if there is a strategy that ensures entropy is below a threshold, thus enforcing a concentration like behavior in the state distributions of the MDP. Several related problems may also be equally interesting: for instance, one could ask if there is a strategy that enforces high entropy (which would correspond to diversity or fairness), or whether all strategies after a point remain fair or concentrated (high or low entropy). It is not immediately clear whether the strong duality results that we utilize can be adapted to these settings, and addressing these different questions would form an interesting line of future research. We showed NP-hardness (even for approximations), and developed a convex-duality and invariant-synthesis based algorithm to solve the problem that is always sound, and is relatively complete assum-ing Schanuel’s conjecture. We leave decidability of the general low entropy decision problem open, but we expect it to be as hard as the so-called positivity problem [OW14], similar to what was shown for affine distributional safety objectives [ACMŽ23]. As future work, we are interested in improving our templates in theory and in practice to be able to handle more benchmarks with stronger guarantees, and in further exploring the capability and limitations of convex invariants for distributional objectives. 

# Acknowledgements 

We acknowledge support from the Department of Atomic Energy, Government of India [project num-ber RTI4014]; by the Infosys-Chandrasekharan virtual center for Random Geometry at the Tata Insti-tute of Fundamental Research; by the Science and Engineering Research Board [grant number MATRICS 20 MTR/2023/001547]; by the Google India Research Award; and by a gift to TIFR from Adobe, Inc. The results reported in this manuscript do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agencies listed above. 

# References 

[AAGT15] M. Agrawal, S. Akshay, B. Genest, and P. S. Thiagarajan. Approximate verification of the symbolic dynamics of Markov chains. J. ACM , 62(1):2:1–2:34, 2015. DOI: 10.1145/2629417. [AB09] S. Arora and B. Barak. Computational Complexity: A Modern Approach . Cambridge Uni-versity Press, 2009. DOI: 10.1017/CBO9780511804090. [ACMŽ23] S. Akshay, K. Chatterjee, T. Meggendorfer, and D. Žikelić. MDPs as Distribution Trans-formers: Affine Invariant Synthesis for Safety Objectives. In Proc. International Conference on Computer Aided Verification (CAV) , volume 13966 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science ,pages 86–112. Springer Nature Switzerland, 2023. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-37709-9_5. [ACMZ24] S. Akshay, K. Chatterjee, T. Meggendorfer, and D. Zikelic. Certified policy verification and synthesis for MDPs under distributional reach-avoidance properties. In Proc. Interna-tional Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) , pages 3–12, 2024. DOI: 10.24963/ij-cai.2024/1. [AGR24] A. Abate, M. Giacobbe, and D. Roy. Stochastic omega-regular verification and control with supermartingales. In Prof. International Conference on Computer Aided Verification (CAV) ,volume 14683 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 395–419. Springer, 2024. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-65633-0_18. [AGV18] S. Akshay, B. Genest, and N. Vyas. Distribution-based objectives for Markov decision processes. In Proc. ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS) , pages 36– 45. ACM, 2018. DOI: 10.1145/3209108.3209185. [AMTZ22] M. Anand, V. Murali, A. Trivedi, and M. Zamani. 𝑘 -inductive barrier certificates for stochas-tic systems. In Proc. 25th ACM International Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control (HSCC) , pages 12:1–12:11. ACM, 2022. DOI: 10.1145/3501710.3519532. [BCJ +23] K. Batz, M. Chen, S. Junges, B. L. Kaminski, J. Katoen, and C. Matheja. Probabilistic program verification via inductive synthesis of inductive invariants. In Proc. International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS) , volume 13994 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 410–429. Springer, 2023. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-30820-8_25. [BLNW14] F. Biondi, A. Legay, B. F. Nielsen, and A. Wąsowski. Maximizing entropy over Markov processes. Journal of Logical and Algebraic Methods in Programming , 83(5-6):384–399, 2014. DOI: 10.1016/j.jlamp.2014.05.001. [BV04] S. P. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe. Convex optimization . Cambridge University Press, 2004. [Can88] J. Canny. Some algebraic and geometric computations in PSPACE. In Proc. ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC) , pages 460–467, New York, NY, USA, 1988. ACM. DOI: 10.1145/62212.62257. 21 [CFG16] K. Chatterjee, H. Fu, and A. K. Goharshady. Termination analysis of probabilistic programs through Positivstellensatz’s. In Proc. International Conference on Computer Aided Verifica-tion (CAV) , volume 9779 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 3–22. Springer, 2016. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-41528-4_1. [CFGG20] K. Chatterjee, H. Fu, A. K. Goharshady, and E. K. Goharshady. Polynomial invariant gen-eration for non-deterministic recursive programs. In Proc. 41st ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI) , pages 672–687. ACM, 2020. DOI: 10.1145/3385412.3385969. [CGG +25] K. Chatterjee, A. K. Goharshady, E. K. Goharshady, M. Karrabi, M. Saadat, M. Seeliger, and D. Žikelić. POLYQENT : A polynomial quantified entailment solver. In Proc. International Symposium on Automated Technology for Verification and Analysis (ATVA) , volume 16145 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 411–424, 2025. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-032-08707-2_19. arXiv:2408.03796. [CGMZ22] K. Chatterjee, A. K. Goharshady, T. Meggendorfer, and D. Zikelic. Sound and complete certificates for quantitative termination analysis of probabilistic programs. In Proc. Inter-national Conference on Computer Aided Verification (CAV) , volume 13371 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 55–78. Springer, 2022. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-13185-1_4. [CGSS13] A. Cimatti, A. Griggio, B. J. Schaafsma, and R. Sebastiani. The MathSAT5 SMT Solver. In Proc. International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analy-sis of Systems (TACAS) , volume 7795 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 93–107. Springer, 2013. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-36742-7_7. [CH14] T. Chen and T. Han. On the complexity of computing maximum entropy for Marko-vian models. In Proc. 34th International Conference on Foundation of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science (FSTTCS) , volume 29 of LIPIcs , pages 571–583. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2014. DOI: 10.4230/LIPICS.FSTTCS.2014.571. [CKV +11] R. Chadha, V. A. Korthikanti, M. Viswanathan, G. Agha, and Y. Kwon. Model checking MDPs with a unique compact invariant set of distributions. In Proc. 8th International Con-ference on Quantitative Evaluation of Systems, (QEST) , pages 121–130. IEEE, 2011. DOI: 10.1109/QEST.2011.22. [CNv17] K. Chatterjee, P. Novotný, and D. Žikelić. Stochastic invariants for probabilistic termina-tion. In Proc. 44th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles of Programming Languag (POPL) ,pages 145–160, 2017. DOI: 10.1145/3009837.3009873. [CS01] M. Colón and H. Sipma. Synthesis of linear ranking functions. In Proc. International Confer-ence on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS) , volume 2031 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 67–81. Springer, 2001. DOI: 10.1007/3-540-45319-9_6. [CSS03] M. Colón, S. Sankaranarayanan, and H. Sipma. Linear invariant generation using non-linear constraint solving. In Proc. International Conference on Computer Aided Verification (CAV) , volume 2725 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 420–432. Springer, 2003. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-540-45069-6_39. [CT06] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas. Elements of information theory . Wiley, second edition, 2006. DOI: 10.1002/047174882X. 22 [CTSR17] B. K. Chu, M. J. Tse, R. R. Sato, and E. L. Read. Markov state models of gene regulatory networks. BMC Syst. Biol. , 11:14:1–14:17, 2017. DOI: 10.1186/S12918-017-0394-4. [dMB08] L. de Moura and N. Bjørner. Z3: An Efficient SMT Solver. In Proc. International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS) , volume 4963 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 337–340. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-540-78800-3_24. [DMS14] L. Doyen, T. Massart, and M. Shirmohammadi. Limit synchronization in Markov decision processes. In Proc. International Conference on Foundations of Software Science and Compu-tation Structures (FoSSaCS) , volume 8412 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 58–72. Springer, 2014. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-54830-7_4. [DMS19] L. Doyen, T. Massart, and M. Shirmohammadi. The complexity of synchronizing markov decision processes. J. Comput. Syst. Sci. , 100:96–129, 2019. DOI: 10.1016/J.JCSS.2018.09.004. [GAXJ24] Y. Gao, A. Abate, L. Xie, and K. H. Johansson. Distributional reachability for Markov decision processes: Theory and applications. IEEE Trans. Autom. Control , 69(7):4598–4613, 2024. DOI: 10.1109/TAC.2023.3341282. [GLS93] M. Grötschel, L. Lovász, and A. Schrijver. Geometric Algorithms and Combinatorial Opti-mization , volume 2 of Algorithms and Combinatorics . Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, second corrected edition, 1993. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-78240-4. [GM15] M. Gario and A. Micheli. PySMT: a solver-agnostic library for fast prototyping of SMT-based algorithms. In SMT Workshop , 2015. URL: https://github.com/pysmt/pysmt .[Gur] Gurobi Optimization, LLC. Gurobi Optimizer Reference Manual. Available from https: //www.gurobi.com .[Han88] D. Handelman. Representing polynomials by positive linear functions on com-pact convex polyhedra. Pacific Journal of Mathematics , 132(1):35–62, 1988. DOI: 10.2140/pjm.1988.132.35. [KA11] Y. Kwon and G. A. Agha. Verifying the evolution of probability distributions governed by a DTMC. IEEE Trans. Software Eng. , 37(1):126–141, 2011. DOI: 10.1109/TSE.2010.80. [KVAK10] V. A. Korthikanti, M. Viswanathan, G. Agha, and Y. Kwon. Reasoning about MDPs as trans-formers of probability distributions. In Proc. 7th International Conference on the Quantita-tive Evaluation of Systems (QEST) , pages 199–208. IEEE, 2010. DOI: 10.1109/QEST.2010.35. [LP17] D. A. Levin and Y. Peres. Markov Chains and Mixing Times . Number 107 in AMS Non-Series Monographs. American Mathematical Society, second edition, 2017. DOI: 10.1090/mbk/107. [MSP +17] A. Meurer, C. P. Smith, M. Paprocki, O. Čertík, S. B. Kirpichev, M. Rocklin, A. Kumar, S. Ivanov, J. K. Moore, S. Singh, T. Rathnayake, S. Vig, B. E. Granger, R. P. Muller, F. Bonazzi, H. Gupta, S. Vats, F. Johansson, F. Pedregosa, M. J. Curry, A. R. Terrel, v. Roučka, A. Saboo, I. Fernando, S. Kulal, R. Cimrman, and A. Scopatz. SymPy: symbolic computing in python. 

PeerJ Computer Science , 3:e103, 2017. DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.103. [MW96] A. Macintyre and A. J. Wilkie. On the decidability of the real exponential field. In P. Odifreddi, editor, Kreiseliana: Essays About and Around Georg Kreisel , pages 441–467. A K Peters, 1996. URL: https://philpapers.org/rec/MACOTD-3 .23 [OW14] J. Ouaknine and J. Worrell. Positivity problems for low-order linear recurrence se-quences. In Proc. 25th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA) , pages 366– 379, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2014. DOI: 10.5555/2634074.2634101. [PBP +17] S. K. Palaniappan, F. Bertaux, M. Pichené, E. Fabre, G. Batt, and B. Genest. Abstracting the dynamics of biological pathways using information theory: a case study of apoptosis path-way. Bioinformatics , 33(13):1980–1986, 2017. DOI: 10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTX095. [PJP07] S. Prajna, A. Jadbabaie, and G. J. Pappas. A framework for worst-case and stochastic safety verification using barrier certificates. IEEE Trans. Autom. Control , 52(8):1415–1428, 2007. DOI: 10.1109/TAC.2007.902736. [Put94] M. L. Puterman. Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming .Wiley Series in Probability and Mathematical Statistics. Applied Probability and Statistics Section. Wiley, New York, 1994. [Roc70] R. T. Rockafellar. Convex Analysis . Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 1970. [SOC +20] Y. Savas, M. Ornik, M. Cubuktepe, M. O. Karabag, and U. Topcu. Entropy Maximization for Markov Decision Processes Under Temporal Logic Constraints. IEEE Trans. Autom. Control , 65(4):1552–1567, 2020. DOI: 10.1109/TAC.2019.2922583. [ST11] S. Sankaranarayanan and A. Tiwari. Relational abstractions for continuous and hybrid systems. In Proc. International Conference on Computer Aided Verification (CAV) , volume 6806 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 686–702. Springer, 2011. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-22110-1_56. [Tre01] L. Trevisan. Non-approximability results for optimization problems on bounded degree instances. In Proc. ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC) , pages 453–461. ACM, 2001. DOI: 10.1145/380752.380839. [Vaz03] V. V. Vazirani. Approximation Algorithms . Springer, 2003. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-662-04565-7. [Vis21] N. K. Vishnoi. Algorithms for Convex Optimization . Cambridge University Press, 2021. DOI: 10.1017/9781108699211. [Wil97] A. J. Wilkie. Schanuel’s Conjecture and the Decidability of the Real Exponential Field. In B. T. Hart, A. H. Lachlan, and M. A. Valeriote, editors, Algebraic Model Theory , pages 223–230. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 1997. DOI: 10.1007/978-94-015-8923-9_11. [YN76] D. B. Yudin and A. S. Nemirovskii. Informational complexity and efficient methods for the solution of convex extremal problems. Èkonomika i Matematicheskie Metody , 12:357–369, 1976. In Russian. English translation: Matekon 13 (3) (1977) 25–45. 24 A A strong duality result for entropy 

In this section, we provide the proof of Proposition 10. As mentioned in Section 5, we need a strong duality result which is usually stated under the additional hypothesis that the feasible point 𝑥 0 has all its entries strictly positive (this is the version given, e.g., by [BV04]), in which form it is proved using Slater’s constraint qualification. However, as we show below, this additional hypothesis is not required for maximum-entropy programs with linear constraints, which is the setting that we are interested in. In this case, it is sufficient that the primal program has at least one feasible solution, and this can be shown for instance using the general duality results of [Roc70, Theorem 30.4]. Again, we believe this result to be folklore, but for the sake of completeness, and due to its independent interest, we restate it here and provide a proof. 

Proposition 10. Let 𝑄 ∈ Rℓ ×𝑛 and 𝑝 ∈ Rℓ be fixed. Let D · ·= {𝑥 |𝑥 ≥ 0} ⊆ R𝑛 be the domain of the convex function 𝑓 (𝑥 ) · ·= 𝑛 Í

> 𝑖 =1

𝑥 𝑖 log 𝑥 𝑖 . Suppose that there is an 𝑥 0 ∈ D satisfying 𝑄𝑥 0 ≤ 𝑝 . Then the optimization program 

sup  

> 𝑥 ∈ D

𝐻 (𝑥 ) subject to 𝑄𝑥 ≤ 𝑝 and ®1⊤𝑥 = 1 (24) 

has the same optimal value as the program 

inf  

> 𝜆 ≥0

𝑔 (𝜆 ) · ·= 𝑝 ⊤𝜆 + log 

> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

exp (− 𝜆 ⊤𝑄 𝑖 )

!

. (25) 

Here 𝑄 𝑖 denotes 𝑖 th column of 𝑄 . Further, 𝑔 is a convex function of 𝜆 .Proof of Proposition 10. One way to prove strong duality for the maximum-entropy program in eq. (24), without requiring a strictly positive feasible solution is to consider the so-called convex bifunction 

𝐹 = 𝐹 (𝑢, 𝑥 ) associated with the program in eq. (24) [Roc70, pp. 293–294]. (Formally, to use the definition given by Rockafellar, one has to consider the equivalent problem of minimizing the convex function 

𝑓 (𝑥 ) · ·= −𝐻 (𝑥 ) under the same constraints as those in eq. (24).) Because of the continuity of 𝐻 over 

D = {𝑥 : 𝑥 ≥ 0}, and the fact that all our constraints are affine, the resulting convex bifunction is, to use Rockafellar’s terminology, both proper (i.e. it is not identically equal to +∞ and takes values only in R ∪ {∞} ; in particular, it does not take the value −∞ ) and closed (in this context, this means that for any real 𝑤 , the set {( 𝑢, 𝑥 )| 𝐹 (𝑢, 𝑥 ) ≤ 𝑤 } is a closed set). The two important features of the program in eq. (24) for us are the following: 

• Given the assumption of primal feasibility, the feasible set of eq. (24) is non-empty. It is also a 

bounded affine set, being an intersection of an affine set with the compact set 

𝑥 : 𝑥 ≥ 0 and ®1⊤𝑥 = 1 .

• For all 𝑥 in this feasible set, we have 𝑓 (𝑥 ) = −𝐻 (𝑥 ) ≤ 0.In terms of Rockafellar’s bifunction formalism, these two features translate into the condition that the set {𝑥 : 𝐹 (0, 𝑥 ) ≤ 0} is a non-empty and bounded set. We now use Theorem 30.4 (g) combined with Theorem 30.3 of [Roc70], which together say that if the bifunction 𝐹 associated with a convex program is closed and proper, and if there exists a real number 𝛼 such that the set {𝑥 : 𝐹 (0, 𝑥 ) ≤ 𝛼 } is non-empty, then strong duality (refereed to as normality in [Roc70]) holds for the convex program. In light of the discussion above about the closed and proper nature of the bifunction 𝐹 , the condition {𝑥 : 𝐹 (0, 𝑥 ) ≤ 0}

therefore implies strong duality for our convex program. (Intuitively, the main technical idea under-lying Rockafellar’s strong duality result cited above is the fact that for any proper and closed convex function 𝑔 , the set of points where 𝑔 achieves its minimum value is a non-empty and bounded set if 25 and only if the convex conjugate 𝑔 ∗ of 𝑔 takes only finite values in some open ball containing 0 [Roc70, Theorem 27.1 (d)].) Now, it only remains to note that the dual program described in Theorem 30.3 of [Roc70] has the same optimal value as eq. (25). To see this, we note that the derivation of the dual program described in Theorem 30.3 of [Roc70] (and defined on pp. 309-311 of the same book), when carried out for the max-entropy program of eq. (24), leads to exactly the same computations as those in the derivation of eq. (25) by [BV04, p. 228]. The dual program thus turns out to have the same optimal value as eq. (25). □

# B Experiments 

In this section, we provide details regarding our experiments. As mentioned in the main text, our goal is not to provide an efficient or even effective implementation given that our algorithm is only decidable under assumption of Schanuel’s conjecture. Instead our goal is to illustrate that using state-of-the-art solvers, we can get effective solutions in many cases, with interesting phenomena being observed in other cases. 

## B.1 Experimental Details 

Below, we have listed some example MDPs and MCs on which our algorithm has been tested. We have also compared the output of our algorithm with the “best/optimal” answer we could find for Low-Entropy (obtained by grid-search over all possible randomized policies, with the runs simulated for 1000 steps) and - wherever possible - lower bounds on the optimal answer possible under the restriction to convex sets as the invariant. Wherever the size/nature of the invariant set has been mentioned, we have aimed to mention the smallest invariant set under which the mentioned answer is given. This is done by starting with a template size of 10, and working one’s way down to an invariant of size 1. Where it is mentioned that an empty invariant set suffices, that would imply that for a template of size 1, a trivial invariant such as 0 ≥ 0 is given. Also, in some cases below instead of reporting the entropy we report the exponential of entropy 

𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) for convenience. Further, instead of saying 𝐾 = 0, 1, etc, we sometimes say entropy after step 𝐾 ,essentially meaning the same. For examples taken from [ACMŽ23], the structure and initialization of the MDPs/MCs have been taken from the Artefact Evaluation of the paper at https://zenodo.org/records/7922231 .

## B.2 Benchmarks Details and Results 

We start by describing eight MDP examples, including the seven listed in the main text. In the nu-merical results reported below, all equalities should be interpreted as approximate (with the last digit uncertain). 

B.2.1 MDP examples 

1. MDP 𝑀 1 with 3 states, taken from running example of [ACMŽ23]) 

𝐴 𝐵 𝐶 

𝑎 2, 1

𝑎 1, 1

1

1/2

1/2

26 At the start, in 𝜇 0, state A has probability 12 , state B has probability 13 , state C has probability 16 .In this example, it is optimal to choose action 𝑎 1 always. As the initial probability mass at 𝐴 

exceeds 1 

> 𝑒

, any additional probability mass will only decrease its contribution to the entropy. 

• 𝐾 = 0 Starting from 𝜇 0: With an invariant set of size 2, Gurobi chooses action 𝑎 1 at 𝐴 and outputs an answer of 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) = 2.78718 . It is worthwhile to note that if one simulates a run of this MDP with this strategy, the maximum value of 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) turns out to be less than 2.7495. However, we find numerically that for a particular convex combination of the first two distributions (i.e., 𝜇 0 and 𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 1)) , the exponential of entropy is at least 2.78717, giving a lower bound on the optimal possible output of our algorithm. 

• 𝐾 = 1 Starting from 𝑀 (𝜇 0, 1): Here, the optimal value of 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) is approximately 1.97229, and Gurobi finds this with an invariant set of size two. 

• 𝐾 = 2 Starting from 𝑀 (𝜇 0, 2): Optimal value of 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) is approximately 1.66819 , and this is found by Gurobi with an invariant set of size two. 2. MDP 𝑀 2 with 4 states: 

3

1 2

0

𝑎, 1 𝑏, 1

4/5

1/5

1/2

1/2

1/3 2/3

The initial distribution 𝜇 0 is (0.2, 0.4, 0, 0.4). 

• 𝐾 = 0 Starting from 𝜇 0: The answer given by our Gurobi based solver (in a specific run) with an invariant set of size two is 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) = 3.7568 , with action 𝑎 being chosen with probability about 0.4. With a brute force computation, we can check that the optimal memoryless pol-icy involves selecting action 𝑎 with probability about 0.788 (this number is slightly rounded off, see the below discussion for how to get the analytic value of the optimum), ans leads to a maximum value of 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) of at most 2.9776 .

• 𝐾 = 1 Starting from 𝑀 (𝜇 0, 1): our Gurobi based tool can be made (by choosing appropriate initial conditions) to give an answer of 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) = 2.984322 with an invariant of size five, with the probability of choosing action 𝑎 being 0.57 . This is an example where the initial starting point for Gurobi matters. Note that under this particular probability, 𝑀 (𝜇 0, 4) is a linear 27 combination of 𝑀 (𝜇 0, 1), 𝑀 (𝜇 0, 2), 𝑀 (𝜇 0, 3).

𝜇 (1) =



0, 371 1500 , 649 1500 , 480 1500 



𝜇 (2) =



0, 323 1000 , 1971 7500 , 2071 5000 



𝜇 (3) =



0, 2021 7500 , 5111 15000 , 1949 5000 



𝜇 (4) =



0, 3003 10000 , 3922 12500 , 19297 50000 



𝜇 (4) = 310 𝜇 (1) + 710 𝜇 (2) . It then follows by induction that the convex hull of the the first three points amongst these four, which can be defined by four hyperplanes, serves as a valid invariant set: 𝑀 (𝜇 0, 𝑡 ) lies in this set for all 𝑡 ≥ 1.As in the 𝐾 = 0 case above, a brute force computation shows that the strategy of choosing action 𝑎 with probability 0.788 gives a maximum value of at most 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 0 ) = 2.9776 .3. A five-state MDP 𝑀 3 with two bottom strongly connected component and a transient state. This is the same example as the one used in Proposition 15 above. 

𝑎, 0.7

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

𝑏, 0.05 

𝑏, 0.05 

𝑏, 0.9 𝑎, 0.3

At the start, i.e., in 𝜇 0, the entire probability mass is in the top state. We can parameterize all memoryless strategies in terms of a single parameter 𝑥 ∈ [ 0, 1], and can then plot the entropies at times 𝑡 ∈ { 1, 2, 3} as a function of 𝑥 , as described in the proof of Proposition 15. As noted there, the maximum of these three functions is always above 0.77 (from the same computation, one can also find that the best achievable value of the exponential of the entropy under memoryless strategies is about 2.164 ), whereas with a policy alternating between choosing 𝑎 and 𝑏 , we can achieve a maximum entropy below 0.73 . Our Gurobi based solver reports an answer for entropy of about log 3 , and this is expected, since under the restriction to convex invariants, the minimum possible maximum entropy is no less than ln 3 . To see this, we note that in the convex hull of the initial distribution and 𝑀 (𝜇 0, 𝑛 ), 𝑀 (𝜇 0, 𝑛 + 1) for large 𝑛 , there lie distributions with entropy arbitrary close to ln 3 .4. MDP 𝑀 4 with 5 states and 2 actions : A B C DE

𝑎, 1

𝑏, 1

28 At the start, with 𝜇 0 as state A has probability 910 and state E has probability 110 .

• 𝐾 = 2 Starting from 𝑀 (𝜇 0, 2): Our Gurobi based solver achieves a value of 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) of roughly 

2.0, even with an invariant of size one.. The optimal memoryless policy, in comparison, yields an answer of 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) ≊ 1.35506 , with the probability of choosing action 𝑏 being roughly 0.252241: this can be obtained by parameterizing such strategies as in the proof of Propo-sition 15, which suggests minimizing the two-step entropy given by 

− (0.9 + 0.1𝑥 (1 − 𝑥 )) ln (0.9 + 0.1𝑥 (1 − 𝑥 )) + 0.1(1 − 𝑥 ) ln (0.1(1 − 𝑥 )) + 0.1𝑥 2 ln  0.1𝑥 2 !

,

and then verifying the resulting strategy. This is again an example of an MDP where a randomized policy is better than any determin-istic. Either deterministic policy would give a maximum value of roughly 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) = 1.38414 

over the run of the embedded Markov chain. Interestingly, the optimal policy under the re-striction to convex sets gives a maximum entropy of ln 2 , with the deterministic policy that always chooses action 𝑎 at state 𝐸 . This is because with this strategy, there exists a point in the convex hull of 𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 2) and 𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 3) whose entropy is ln (2), and for a strategy of any other probability of selecting 𝑎 , there is a point of higher entropy in this convex hull. 5. MDP 𝑀 5 with 3 states, with warm-up parameter 𝐾 = 0:

𝐴 

𝐵 𝐶 

𝑎, 1/2  

> 𝑎, 1/4
> 𝑎, 1/4

𝑏, 1/4

𝑏, 1/4 

> 𝑏, 1/2

1/3

1/3

1/3 2/5

2/5

1/5

Initially, all the probability mass is in A, i.e., 𝜇 0 = (1, 0, 0) . With an invariant of size one, our Gurobi based tool reports an answer of 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) = 2.9543 , choosing action 𝑎 with probability one. By a brute force computation we check that this is indeed the optimal memoryless policy for this problem, but it achieves a somewhat better answer of 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) = 2.93492 , again highlighting that restriction to a convex invariant can be over-cautious. 6. Split (MDP with 4 states and 2 disconnected components taken from [ACMŽ23]): 

𝐴 

𝐵 

𝐶 

𝐷 

𝑏, 1

𝑎, 0.9

𝑎, 0.1

11

0.5

0.5

29 At the start, i.e., at 𝜇 0 = 0, state A has probability 13 and state C has probability 23 . We consider the case where the warm-up parameter satisfies 𝐾 = 0. Our Gurobi based solved reports an answer of about 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) = 3.77976 , with an invariant set of size one ( 𝐴 +𝐵 ≤ 13 ), and the strategy of always choosing action 𝑏 . On simulating the MDP with this strategy, we find that the maximum entropy attained is at most log 3 . However, under the restriction to convex invariant sets, the optimal answer for this strategy is indeed at least 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) = 3.77976 , as 𝜇 0 = ( 13 , 0, 23 , 0) and the probability distributions 𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝑛 ) converge to (0, 13 , 0, 23 ) as 𝑛 → ∞ , so that the entropy of the average of 

𝜇 0 and 𝑀 𝜋 (𝜇 0, 𝑛 ) for high enough 𝑛 comes arbitrarily close to ln (3.77976 ) from below. 7. Gridworld 1 (MDP with 8 states): This is a grid of size (2,4) with the point (0,1) being unreach-able, as shown in the figure with (0,0) being top-left and (1,3) being bottom-right. Note that all transition probabilities that are not labelled on edges are 1. Also there is a non-deterministic action at state (0,2), where one can go down or right, and a self-loop at (1,3) (thus, this state is an absorbing state). The initial distribution 𝜇 0 assigns all probability mass and the top-left state (0,0). There is no other state (except (1, 3)) with no possible transition to another state. At any other state, one of up to two actions - Down or Right - can be chosen (these are not depicted in the figure, with the figure only showing the structure of MDP), provided the action does not force one off the board or into an unreachable state. Note that in our implementation we simply remove unreachable states, e.g., (0,1) above. Note that there is no randomness in this example, and the entropy of every resulting distribution is 0. However, because we are restricted to finding the largest entropy possible for distributions satisfying a convex invariant, the smallest such invariant will be the convex hull of all these resulting distributions. Our solver should report as the optimal value of 𝑒 𝐻 (𝑢 ) the number of vertices along the shortest path from the source to the sink. Indeed, with the warm-up parameter set to 0, and an invariant set of size two, our Gurobi based solver estimates an optimal answer of approximately 5 (corresponding to a shortest path of length four containing five vertices). 8. Gridworld 2 (MDP with 12 states): We have a grid of size (3,4) with the unreachable states as (1, 1), (2, 1) and (1, 3) (with (0, 0) being top left and (2, 3) the bottom right). At any other state, one of up to two actions - Down or Right - can be chosen, provided the action does not force one off the board or into an unreachable state. All transitions that are drawn in the picture are assumed to have probability 1. Further, the state (2, 3) is absorbing, so has a self loop with prob 1. From any reachable state except (2, 3) which does not have transitions marked in the figure, in the actual model there is a transition from that state to all other reachable states with uniform probability. The initial distribution 𝜇 0 is top-left state (0,0) having probability 1. 30 Note again that while there is some randomness in this example, it is similar to the previous example in that there is a strategy under which the entropy of every resulting distribution is 0.However, again, because we are restricted to finding the largest entropy possible for distributions satisfying a convex invariant, the smallest such invariant will be the convex hull of all these resulting distributions. Our solver should thus report as the optimal value of 𝑒 𝐻 (𝑢 ) the number of vertices along the shortest path from the source to the sink, , and should find the strategy that induces this shortest path. Indeed, with the warm-up parameter set to 0, and an invariant set of size two, our Gurobi based solver estimates an optimal answer of approximately 6 (corresponding to a shortest path of length five containing six vertices), and find the strategy that induces this shortest path (Right at 0, 0, and Down at (0, 2)), using an invariant set of size one. 

B.2.2 Markov chain examples 

Below we describe our Markov chain examples. 1. Markov chain 𝑀𝐶 1 with two states BA 10.5 0.5 At the start, i.e., in 𝜇 0, state A has probability 23 and state B has probability 13 .

• 𝐾 = 0 Starting from 𝜇 0: Our Gurobi based solver reports an answer of 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) = 2.000 ,with an invariant set of size one. By simulating a run of the MC, the maximum value of 

𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) over the run is 1.88988. However, since the distribution (1/2, 1/2) is contained in the convex hull of 𝜇 0 and 𝑀 (𝜇 0, 1), the answer reported by our solver is the best possible for any convex invariant based method. 

• 𝐾 = 1 Starting from 𝑀 (𝜇 0, 1): The solver reports the approximately correct optimal value of 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) = 1.88988 , using an invariant set of size one. 

• 𝐾 = 2 Starting from 𝑀 (𝜇 0, 2): The solver reports the approximately correct optimal value of 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) = 1.88988 , using an invariant set of size one. 2. Markov chain 𝑀𝐶 2 with two states: A B10.5 0.5 At the start, i.e., in 𝜇 0, both A and B have 12 of the probability each. 

• 𝐾 = 1, 2, starting from 𝑀 (𝜇 0, 1) or 𝑀 (𝜇 0, 2): Our Gurobi based solver outputs the correct optimal value of 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) = 1.93782 , with an invariant set of size two. 

• 𝐾 = 3, starting from 𝑀 (𝜇 0, 3): Our Gurobi based solver outputs the correct optimal value of 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) = 1.903114 with an invariant set of size two. 3. Markov chain MC3, an ergodic Markov chain with three states: 31 𝐴 𝐵 

𝐶 

0.5

0.25 

0.25 

0.5

0.25 

0.25 0.25 

0.25 0.5

Initially, the probability distribution 𝜇 0 is (1, 0, 0). Starting from 𝜇 0 (𝐾 = 0), the Gurobi based solver reports the optimal answer of 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) = 3.4. Insulin: Pharmokinetics benchmark taken originally from [CKV +11], but as modified in [AAGT15, Example 2], which we describe briefly. This Markov chain has five non-dummy nodes where three of the nodes correspond to the “body compartments” Plasma (Pl), Intersticial Fluid (IF), and “Utilization and degradation” (Ut). The node (Dr) models the drug being injected, and the node (Cl) models “the drug being cleared from the body after degradation.” The transition matrix of the chain is (with the first row corresponding to state Dr, and the last to state Cl): 



> 4699 5000 1317 50000 641 25000 399 50000 312500

0 5181 25000 24149 50000 3703 12500 677 50000 

0 15531 100000 42539 100000 3953 10000 3125 

0 1299 50000 5389 50000 38927 50000 877 10000 

0 0 0 0 1



At the start, state Dr has probability 310 and state Cl has probability 710 . For this problem, starting from 𝜇 0, the answer reported by our Gurobi based solver seems to depend quite significantly on the seed, with one particular run reporting the value 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) = 2.72 , obtained with an invariant of size five (for this example, it also helps to run the solver without the pre-imposed bounds on the magnitudes of the template variables). The optimal answer, obtained by simulating the Markov chain, is 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) = 2.3717679 .5. Pagerank (A 5-state Markov chain taken from [AAGT15][Example 1, Fig 3.]). This chains has five states, with the transition matrix given by 



> 180 19 60 340 19 60 67 240 180 120 41 120 19 60 67 240 116 143814116 180 120 78120 180 33 80 920 340 120 180



,

with the rows and column corresponding to states A, B, C, D, and E in alphabetical order. At the start, the probability distribution over the states A, B, C, D, and E is ( 116 , 416 , 616 , 416 , 116 ). Starting from 𝜇 0 (𝐾 = 0), the answer given by our Gurobi based solver with an invariant set of size three is about 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) = 4.65 (for this problem, it helps to run the solver without any pre-imposed bounds on the template variables, and the answers reported by the solver seems to depend significantly on the initial random seed provided to it). The optimal value, found by simulation, is 𝑒 𝐻 (𝜇 ) =

4.231614 .32 B.3 Summary of Results 

We summarize the above results in Table 2. As can be seen, in most benchmarks the results given by our approach are not far from the optimal results (empirically determined using simulations in most cases). Further experiments show that our approach works on even larger benchmarks, but as there seems no way to compare those results against optimal results in those cases (due to difficulty of finding the optimal answer in large systems) in, we do not describe them here. Thus, in summary, the prototype implementation of our method works on a variety of MDPs and MCs with different features, producing results that are not far from an empirically observed optimal. 

Name #States K exp(Answer Given) exp(Optimal) EntAns EntOpt Type MC 

MDP 𝑀 1 3 0 2.782 2.749 1.023 1.011 MDP 𝑀 1 3 1 1.972 1.972 0.679 0.679 MDP 𝑀 1 3 2 1.668 1.668 0.512 0.512 MDP 𝑀 2 4 0 3.757 2.978 1.324 1.091 MDP 𝑀 2 4 1 2.984 2.978 1.093 1.091 MDP 𝑀 3 5 0 3.000 2.164 1.099 0.772 MDP 𝑀 4 5 2 2.000 1.355 0.693 0.304 MDP 𝑀 5 3 0 2.954 2.935 1.083 1.077 Split 4 0 3.780 3.000 1.330 1.099 

Type MC 

MC1 2 0 2.000 1.890 0.693 0.637 MC1 2 1 1.890 1.890 0.637 0.637 MC1 2 2 1.890 1.890 0.637 0.637 MC2 2 1 1.938 1.938 0.662 0.662 MC2 2 2 1.938 1.928 0.662 0.656 MC2 2 3 1.903 1.903 0.643 0.643 MC3 3 0 3.000 3.000 1.099 1.099 Insulin 5 0 2.720 2.372 1.001 0.864 Pagerank 5 0 4.650 4.232 1.537 1.443 Table 2: Comparison of answer reported by our prototype tool vs Optimal Answer across different examples. K denotes the warm-up parameter. Optimal answers are derived by simulation (MCs) or grid search over all MDP policies. We report entropy values as well as their exponential values. All values rounded to three places after decimal. 33